What type of organism is commonly used in preparation of foods such as cheese and yogurt?
mesophilic organisms

What phenomenon makes global winds blow northeast to southwest or the reverse in the northern hemisphere and northwest to southeast or the reverse in the southern hemisphere?
coriolis effect

Changes from a less-ordered state to a more-ordered state (such as a liquid to a solid) are always what?
exothermic

What is the least dangerous radioactive decay?
alpha decay

Kilauea in hawaii is the world’s most continuously active volcano. very active volcanoes characteristically eject red-hot rocks and lava rather than this?
smoke and ash

When a meteoroid reaches earth, what is the remaining object called?
meteorite

What kind of a reaction occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen?
combustion reaction

Organisms categorized by what species descriptor demonstrate a version of allopatric speciation and have limited regions of overlap with one another, but where they overlap they interbreed successfully?.
ring species

Alpha emission is a type of what?
radioactivity

What is the stored food in a seed called?
endosperm

Zinc is more easily oxidized than iron because zinc has a lower reduction potential. since zinc has a lower reduction potential, it is a more what?
active metal

What is controlled by both genes and experiences in a given envionment?
animal behaviors

What tells you how much of the food you should eat to get the nutrients listed on the label?
serving size

What are used to write nuclear equations for radioactive decay?
nuclear symbols

What is controlled by regulatory proteins that bind to regulatory elements on dna?
gene transcription

Boron only occurs naturally in compounds with what element?
oxygen

What organ systems link exchange surfaces with cells throughout the body?
circulatory

What occurs when the immune system attacks a harmless substance that enters the body from the outside?
allergy

Fertilization is the union of a sperm and egg, resulting in the formation of what?
a zygote

The plants alternation between haploid and diploud generations allow it to do what?
reproduce asexually and sexually

Most of the chemical reactions in the body are facilitated by what?
enzymes

What is the termination of a pregnancy in progress called?
abortion

Cutting down on the use of chemical fertilizers and preserving wetlands are ways to prevent what "unlivable" regions in bodies of water?
dead zones

Which muscles allow your fingers to also make precise movements for actions?
intrinsic muscles

Testing what usually requires making observations or performing experiments?
hypothesis

This sharing of electrons produces what is known as a covalent bond. covalent bonds are ~20 to 50 times stronger than what?
van der waals interactions

Water molecules move about continuously due to what type of energy?
kinetic

A small scale version of what type of map displays individual rock units?
geologic map

What is defined as a change in the inherited traits of organisms over time?
evolution

What hormone, which is associated with luteinizing hormone and male sexuality, helps bring about physical changes in puberty?
testosterone

Where do angiosperms produce seeds in flowers?
ovaries

In order to create food, what do photosynthetic protists use?
light energy

What type of vertebrates are birds?
endothermic tetrapod

What type of ions do ionic compounds contain?
positive and negative

All living things need air and this to survive?
water

The cells of all eukarya have a what?
nucleus

What type of plate boundaries produce huge mountain ranges in the ocean basin?
divergent

Interstitial carbides are produced by the reaction of most transition metals at high temperatures with what element?
carbon

Fungus-like protist saprobes play what role in a food chain and are specialized to absorb nutrients from nonliving organic matter, such as dead organisms or their wastes?
decomposers

What are the sites of protein synthesis or assembly?
ribosomes

What must replicate in the cell cycle before meiosis i takes place?
dna

What phenomenon is primarily the result of plate tectonic motions?
earthquake

What is a group of neuron cell bodies in the periphery called?
ganglion

Where does most of our food come from?
angiosperms

Gases are most ideal at high temperature and what pressure?
low

Hard igneous rocks and easily dissolved sedimentary rocks respond very differently to what natural force?
weathering

A diet rich in calcium and what vitamin may reduce the risk of osteoporosis and related bone fractures?
vitamin d

How many people die from air pollution each year?
22 million

What substances serve as catalysts in most of the biochemical reactions that take place in organisms?
enzymes

The formation of an amalgam allows the metal to react with what?
air and water

A pulley changes the direction of the force t exerted by the cord without changing its what?
magnitude

What is the name of the small bumps that contain taste buds and covers the tongue?
papillae

In the absence of air resistance, all falling objects accelerate at the same rate due to what force?
gravity

The ability for a plasma membrane to only allow certain molecules in or out of the cell is referred to as what?
selective permeability

In the presence of oxygen, hydrogen can interact to make what?
water

What galaxy is our solar system a part of?
milky way

The angle at which light bends when it enters a different medium is known as what?
refraction

Whether the organism is a bacterium, plant, or animal, all living things access energy by breaking down these?
carbohydrate molecules

Increasing the temperature of n2 molecules increases what energy of motion?
kinetic energy

Which radio frequency should you listen to if you want less noise?
fm

What form of radiation is the energy emitted by the sun?
electromagnetic

What is the suns innermost layer called?
core

A growth spurt requires constant divisions of what?
cells

What's the term for the gradual progression from simple plants to larger more complex ones in an area?
primary succession

Fungi may form mutualistic relationships with plants, algae, cyanobacteria, and what?
animals

Which cycle tracks the flow of nitrogen through an ecosystem?
nitrogen cycle

What consequence of a tornado is responsible for most injuries and deaths?
flying debris

What are the only truly innate behaviors in humans called?
reflexes

What happens to the density of air as the altitude decreases?
decreases

How do some animals change their depth?
by changing their density

What phenomenon is crowding out other species and making all the other causes of extinction worse?
human overpopulation

Dessication is an extreme and usually fatal form of what in animals?
dehydration

Internal and external forms of what life process occur as simple diffusion due to a partial pressure gradient?
respiration

The fossil record shows that this type of event is followed by the evolution of new species to fill the habitats where old species lived?
mass extinction

Soluble minerals and clays accumulate in what soil layer, allowing it to hold more water?
subsoil

What is the common word for potential difference in a circuit?
voltage

How many chambers does the stomach of a crocodile have?
two

When populations get close to the carrying capacity, what happens to growth?
slows

Although air can transfer heat rapidly by convection, it is a poor conductor and thus a good what?
insulator

Most plants grow continuously, except for what periods?
dormant

What man-made devices in space are used to observe the earth's surface?
satellites

Carboxylic acids are weak acids, meaning they are not 100% ionized in what?
water

An endocrine disease usually involves the secretion of too much or not enough of what?
hormone

In experiments with garden peas, austrian monk gregor mendel described the basic patterns of what?
inheritance

Nutrition and diet affect your metabolism. more energy is required to break down fats and proteins than this?
carbohydrates

What are unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one double bond between carbon atoms called?
alkenes

What is the opposite of melting?
freezing

A unique characteristic of mammals is the ability to chew, this happens by the temporalis and the masseter allowing what?
side-to-side movement

Most of the pathogens that cause stis enter the body through mucous membranes of which organs?
reproductive organs

The activation of what kind of buds induces branching?
axillary buds

Sexual reproduction involves haploid gametes and produces a diploid zygote through what process?
fertilization

All alkanes are composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms, and have similar bonds, structures, and formulas; noncyclic alkanes all have a formula of cnh2n+2. the number of carbon atoms present in an alkane has what?
no limit

What percentage of men suffer from some form of erectile dysfunction by age 40?
approximately 40 percent

What secures together immovable joints and prevents them from moving?
dense collagen

Transform faults are the site of massive what?
earthquakes

When water goes above and below its freezing point, what rock-breaking phenomenon is common?
ice wedging

The diatoms are unicellular photosynthetic protists that encase themselves in intricately patterned, glassy cell walls composed of silicon dioxide in a matrix of organic particles. these protists are a component of freshwater and these?
marine plankton

What type of reactions form compounds?
chemical reactions

Millions of years ago, plants used energy from the sun to form what?
carbon compounds

What is the term for the process in which living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring than others do?
natural selection

In a chemical reaction, the amounts of reactants and products will be constant when what state is attained?
equilibrium

What protects a developing flower while it is still a bud?
sepals

What is the term for the force of attraction between things that have a mass?
gravity

What are the long, thin protein extensions in most prokaryotic cells called?
flagellum

Dialysis is a treatment for failure of what organs?
kidneys

What preventive measure can protect even young children against diseases such as viral meningitis?
vaccination

Renal plasma flow equals the blood flow per minute times the what?
hematocrit

What does lattice energy of an ionic solid measure the strength of?
bonds

How many different types of taste can be detected by taste buds?
five

What species do humans belong to?
homo sapiens

Titration is a method to determine what in acids or bases?
concentration

How many different amino acids make up proteins.
20

What are sores in the lining of the stomach or duodenum that are usually caused by bacterial infections or acidity?
ulcers

In some species, what has led to the evolution of alternative male mating behavior and morphology?
sexual selection

What structure is made from dna and protein molecules coiled together?
chromosome

What renewable energy source converts energy from the sunlight into electricity?
solar energy

The radial artery and which artery parallel their namesake bones, giving off smaller branches until they reach the wrist, or carpal region?
ulnar

The bones of the skull are connected by what type of joints?
immovable

What is the lowest layer of the atmosphere?
troposphere

What is the name of the type of plant tissue consisting of undifferentiated cells that can continue to divide and differentiate?
meristem

Phosphate-containing ocean sediments form primarily from the bodies of ocean organisms and from their what?
excretions

What does erosion do to pieces of broken rock?
moves them

The passing of traits from parents to offspring is done through what?
dna

In a glass of sweet tea the sugar is known as the solute and the water is known as what?
solvent

A few earthquakes take place away from plate boundaries, these are called what?
intraplate earthquakes

Red litmus paper turns what color when placed in a basic solution?
blue

The difference between the theoretical half-reaction reduction potential and the actual voltage required is called what?
overpotential

While the egg is developing, other changes are taking place in the uterus. it develops a thick lining that is full of what?
tiny blood vessels

The neural plate undergoes a series of cell movements where it rolls up and forms a tube called what?
neural tube

Due to the __________ nature of the lipids that make up cell membranes, polar molecules (such as water) and ions cannot easily diffuse across the cell membrane.
hydrophobic

In what way do all vertebrates reproduce?
sexually

First, high temperature denatures proteins and does what to cells?
kills them

What term is used to describe a collection of molecules surrounded by a phospholipid bilayer that is capable of reproducing itself?
cell

By allowing blood levels of a hormone to be regulated within a narrow range, feedback loops contribute to maintaining what state?
homeostasis

Collagen fibers, elastic fibers, and reticular fibers comprise what type of tissue?
connective tissue

What the name of the disease where some of the alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid so they can no longer exchange gas?
pneumonia

What occurs when groups from the same species stop mating because of something other than physical or geographic separation?
sympatric speciation

What environment do animals with gills live in?
water

What is the boiling and freezing point of water in celcius?
100 degrees c and 0 degrees c

What are living things that obtain glucose by eating self feeders called?
heterotrophs

Virtually every task performed by living organisms requires this?
energy

The binding of what helps eliminate antigens by phagocytosis and complement-mediated lysis
antibodies

What muscles are used to pump water over the gills?
jaws and pharynx

Compounds like sodium chloride form structures called what?
crystals

What are made of long chains consisting almost solely of carbon and hydrogen?
lipids

When a series of measurements is precise but not what, the error is usually systematic?
accurate

Inserting copies of normal genes into a patient with defective genes is known as?
gene therapy

What type of reproduction usually occur during times of environmental stress?
sexual reproduction

All forms of energy can be interconverted. three things can change the energy of an object: the transfer of heat, work performed on or by an object, or some combination of what?
heat and work

What science includes many fields of science related to our home planet?
earth science

What are alloys that are mostly composed of mercury known as?
amalgams

What are made from highly reflective metal that is applied to a curved or flat piece of glass?
mirrors

What do ranchers fear will happen if wolves return?
livestock predation

How many types of surface waves are there?
two

What is the rigid layer that is found outside the cell membrane and surrounds the cell?
cell wall

Surface tension of alveolar fluid, which is mostly water, creates an inward pull of the tissue of what organ?
lung

What type of tumor mostly does not cause serious problems and can be completely removed by surgery?
benign

What supports and protects the soft organs of the body?
skeleton

What celestial body is the earth’s main source of energy?
sun

What do you call the horizontal stems of a strawberry plant that run over the ground surface?
stolons

Glaciers are incredibly powerful agents of what?
erosion

What type of pressure is the pressure exerted by gas particles in earth’s atmosphere as those particles collide with objects?
atmospheric pressure

What helps the plasma membrane keep its shape?
molecules of cholesterol

What type of reproduction only involves one parent?
asexual

What is defined as a repeating series of events that include growth, dna synthesis, and cell division?
cell cycle

How metalloids behave in chemical interactions with other elements depends mainly on the number of what, in the outer energy level of their atoms?
electrons

What distinguishing characteristic of annelid anatomy shows specialization and adaptation?
segmentation

The spermatids are transported from the testes to where?
epididymis

How does water from roots reach the leaves?
water-conducting cells

As a polycrystalline material solidifies, grains with irregular shapes form. the interfaces between grains constitute grain what?
boundaries

Motors are the most common application of magnetic force on current-carrying wires. motors have loops of wire in this?
magnetic field

What makes and stores pigments that give petals and fruit their orange and yellow colors?
chromoplasts

What term is used to describe when a liquid is the temperature at which its equilibrium vapor pressure is equal to the pressure exerted on the liquid by its gaseous surroundings?
boiling point

When electrons return to a lower energy level, they emit the excess energy in the form of what?
light

What is another term for nearsightedness?
myopia

What are the areas located at fixed distances from the nucleus of the atom?
energy levels

In which state of matter do particles take the shape of their container, but cannot expand to fill it?
liquid

Runoff is likely to cause more what if the land is bare?
erosion

Cations have what type of charge?
positive

What organ is subdivided into ascending, descending, transverse and sigmoid parts?
colon

Ammonia, urea, and uric acid are examples of what kind of waste?
nitrogenous

What are variants of genes called?
alleles

Mushrooms are an example of what type of organism, which includes beneficial and toxic specimens?
fungi

Comparing what sequences provides clues to evolution and development?
genome

What is a measure of the average amount of energy of motion, or kinetic energy, a system contains called?
temperature

What is the minimum mass capable of supporting sustained fission called?
critical mass

Many hydrocarbons are cyclic and adopt specific three-dimensional structures that influence their physical and what properties?
chemical

The secondary wall contains _________ , a secondary cell component in plant cells that have completed cell growth/expansion.
lignin

What does the cell cycle do?
divide and reproduce cells

Inside the nasal area of the skull, the nasal cavity is divided into halves by the what?
nasal septum

Bacteria can be chemotrophs, which obtain what by breaking down chemical compounds in their environment?
energy

Habitat loss, introduced species, overharvesting, and global change are major threats to what?
biodiversity

What "plumbing" structures inside the veins maintain a unidirectional flow of blood despite the low blood pressure?
valves

What do we call the cartilaginous structure that surrounds the notochrod?
arcualia

What is the process of the transfer of pollen from an anther to a stigma in angiosperms called?
pollination

Despite its small size, an erythrocyte contains about 250 million molecules of what?
hemoglobin

How many variables are used to describe the condition of a gas?
four

What is a suggested explanation for a phenomenon or a suggested explanation for a relationship between many phenomena called?
hypothesis

Land plants are classified into two major groups according to the absence or presence of what tissue?
vascular

What type of treatment is necessary for anaphylaxis?
emergency

What substances, which are distinct from acids and bases, form when ions form ionic bonds?
salts

What is the name for biochemical compounds that consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids?
proteins

What are the ionic compounds that produce negative hydroxide ions when dissolved in water?
bases

The atomic number of tungsten is 74. therefore, in a neutral atom of tungsten, there are 74 electrons. the atomic number of argon is 18. therefore, in a neutral atom of argon, there are how many electrons?
18

What is the apparatus used for carrying out an electrolysis reaction?
an electrolytic cell

What two ways may light be transmitted?
refracted or scattered

Triggered by changes in the environment, migration and hibernation occur as cycles on what temporal basis?
annual

What pair of tubes that extends toward the ovaries features a fringelike structure that sweeps eggs inside?
fallopian tubes

In most animals, what sense is related to balance or equilibrium?
hearing

Terminal pods are located at the end of what?
stems

What forms when the spores from two parents fuse during sexual reproduction?
zygospore

What is the name of the galaxy we live in?
milky way

What are the most common seedless vascular plants?
ferns

In a monogamous pairing, a male individual is generally paired with what other type of individual in a sexual relationship?
female

What is a mass spectrometer used to measure?
relative atomic masses

What combines sets of genes from two different parents leading to genetically diverse offspring?
sexual reproduction

Global warming will raise ocean levels due to melt water from glaciers and the greater volume of what?
warmer water

What are groups of young stars loosely held together by gravity called?
open clusters

What does a pollinator pick up from its body and carry directly to another plant of the same species?
pollen

What is formed when an oxygen atom picks up a pair of hydrogen ions from a solution?
water

What does the driving of turbines by the heating of water to steam accomplish?
generation of electricity

What is a device that changes kinetic energy to electrical energy through electromagnetic induction?
an electric generator

How many naturally occurring elements are known on earth?
90

What are the two types of vesicle transport called?
endocytosis and exocytosis

What do you call a species that has died out in the past?
extinct

Where does the embryo develop in a plant?
inside the female plant after fertilization

What is the method of setting or correcting a measuring device by matching it to known measurement standards called?
calibration

What property of warm air causes it to rise above cold air?
lower density

Which branch of biology studies animal behavior?
ethology

What unit of measure is equal to the amount of work a horse can do in 1 minute?
horsepower

What organism is characterized by an incomplete digestive system and a single, tentacled opening?
cnidarians

What term is not the same as energy, but means the energy per unit charge?
voltage

What specific part of the african violet is used to propagate other plants?
leaves

What are fibers that depend on aerobic respiration called?
oxidative fibers

Which form of electromagnetic waves have more energy: low frequency wave or high frequency waves?
high frequency waves

Something that has all of the characteristics of life is considered to be what?
alive

What do the letters in our blood types represent?
alleles

The two stages of photosynthesis are the light reactions and what?
calvin cycle

What do living things need to survive?
nutrients

The denser regions of the electron cloud are called what?
orbitals

In studying energy, what term do scientists use to refer to the matter and its environment involved in energy transfers?
system

To measure what changes that occur in chemical reactions, chemists usually use a related thermodynamic quantity, calledenthalpy?
energy

A system in what state cannot spontaneously change, and therefore can do no work?
equilibrium

What is a species that plays an especially important role in it's community called?
keystone

What term that shows how fast a population is growing includes new members added to the population over a given period, as well as old members removed from the population?
growth rate

The rings of what planet can be easily seen from earth?
saturn

What planet is a blue green color?
uranus

The simplest class of organic compounds is the what?
hydrocarbons

Some meteorites are made of iron and nickel and are thought to be very similar to what part of the earth?
core

Which pathway carries somatosensory information from the face, head, mouth, and nasal cavity?
trigeminal pathway

The amount of kinetic energy in a moving object depends directly on its mass and what else?
velocity

Cycling, shoveling snow and cross-country skiing are examples of what kind of heart-strengthening activity?
aerobic

What take the shape of their container, and are relatively easy to compress?
gases

What is moving air called?
wind

What property makes bone marrow cells ideal for gene therapy?
lifelong reproduction

What is the name of the two metalloids in the carbon group called?
silicon and germanium

What is the name of the zone where water is deeper than 200 meters called?
aphotic zone

Diagnosing and treating cancer is a beneficial use of what potentially dangerous energy?
radiation

Many adults and some children suffer from a deficiency of lactase. these individuals are said to be lactose intolerant because they cannot digest the lactose found in what?
milk

Three-prong plugs, circuit breakers, and gfci outlets are safety features that recognize the danger of what?
electricity

Catabolic reactions break down large organic molecules into smaller molecules, releasing the energy contained in what?
chemical bonds

In qualitative analysis, reagents are added to an unknown chemical mixture in order to induce what?
precipitation

While climate change in earth history was due to natural processes, what is primarily to blame for recent global warming?
human actions

What is the simplest life cycle?
haploid life cycle

What keeps the moon orbiting earth?
gravity

What are formed by the attraction between oppositely charged ions?
ionic bonds

What produces hormones that directly regulate body processes?
hypothalamus

Comparing anatomy, and characterizing the similarities and differences, provides evidence of what process?
evolution

What is the second most abundant element in the earth's crust?
silicon

Which kind of genetics approach involves mutating or deleting genes provides researchers with clues about gene function?
reverse genetics

More than half of all known organisms are what?
insects

For what purpose does liver use the excess carbohydrate?
to synthesize glycogen

Saturn is made mostly of helium and what else?
hydrogen

What are alkenes organic compounds that contain one or more double or triple bonds between carbon atoms described as?
unsaturated

Electrons in covalent compounds are shared between the two atoms, unlike the case in what type of bonds?
ionic bonds

What is the resistance of a liquid to flow called?
viscosity

The mass of atoms is based on the number of protons and neutrons in what?
nucleus

Where do polychaete worms live?
the ocean floor

What is the study of how and why plants and animals live where they do?
biogeography

Muscles that position the pectoral girdle are located either on the anterior thorax or on this?
posterior thorax

What are the two major types of seed plants called?
gymnosperms and angiosperms

What do we call the energy-rich product of photosynthesis?
glucose

How is oxygen transferred into the bloodstream?
simple diffusion

Ringworm and athlete's foot are human diseases caused by what simple organisms?
fungi

What is the measure of the change in the velocity of a moving object called?
acceleration

What is the usual treatment for acute bronchitis?
antibiotics

What are generally divided into prosimian and non-prosimian?
primates

The creation and destruction of oceanic crust is the reason what moves?
continents

What is the concept by which two species within the same area to coexist by adapting by developing different specializations?
character displacement

A turbine that spins a generator will produce?
electricity

Meiosis in the sporophyte produces haploid cells called what?
spores

In this type of reaction, an element replaces another element in a compound, and the element is in any state of matter but is not an ion?
single-replacement reaction

What are the two distinct types of cells found in the animal kingdom?
prokaryotes and eukaryotes

What category of elements are chacterized by their ability to reflect light, called luster, their high electrical and thermal conductivity, their high heat capacity, and their malleability and ductility?
metals

Angiosperms are also known as what?
flowering plants

An estimated 100 trillion of these live in the gut of an average person?
bacteria

The ability to regulate what, which is possessed by mammals, was an advantage as earth’s climate went through sudden and dramatic changes?
body temperature

What is the term for very large arrays of tandemly repeating, non-coding dna?
satellite dna

What kind of map can show the features of the bottom of a body of water?
bathymetric

What evolved, adapted response to resource availability is the long-range seasonal movement of animals?
migration

When animals get rid of their gaseous waste, what is exhaled through their mouth and nose?
carbon dioxide

What is another name for composite volcanos?
stratovolcanoes

Fossil records support the idea that periods of little change may be interrupted by bursts of rapid change, an evolutionary model contrasted by what?
gradualism

What type of winds occur when air is forced over a mountain range?
chinook winds

What do clouds trap into the atmosphere at night?
heat

A nerve cell that carries messages is called a?
neuron

What group of animals are the largest arthropods?
insects

What term describes a collection of similar cells that had a common embryonic origin?
tissue

Most biochemical molecules are macromolecules, meaning that they are what?
very large

The name of a spinal cord region corresponds to the level at which spinal nerves pass through the what?
intervertebral foramina

Tests for levels of what in blood allow a diabetic patient to regulate how much insulin to administer?
glucose

The process of breaking down food into nutrients is known as __________
digestion

Reasoning can be broken down into two categories: deduction and?
induction

What are used to make maps of the moon and other planets?
imaging satellites

What term describes how closely packed the particles of matter are?
density

Populations of viruses do not grow through cell division because they?
are not cells

What is likely to happen to a parasite if it kills its host?
it dies

What is a type of solid that lacks an ordered internal structure?
an amorphous solid

What is it called when you get the same result after repeating an experiment?
replication

What is the largest human organ?
skin

In the chest, the trachea divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left what?
bronchi

Many objects have color because they contain what?
pigments

What is the process of action potentials in myelinated axons jumping between the nodes of ranvier called?
saltatory conduction

What do craters and rifts become when the fill with water?
lakes

What kind of power does not produce any pollutants, but produces waste that can be difficult to dispose of?
nuclear

What is the long, narrow tube that carries food from the pharynx to the stomach by the mechanism of peristalsis?
esophagus

What is the temperature at which condensation of water vapor occurs called?
the dew point

Alkenes have double bonds while alkynes have what?
triple bonds

What is our main source of aluminum ore?
bauxite

Rapidly produced genetic vairants are found in organisms with what type of generation time?
short

What are the 2 primary hosts of ebola in central africa?
apes and bats

Unlike prokaryotic cells, dna and rna synthesis in eukaryotic cells occurs in a separate compartment from synthesis of what?
protein

What important organelle (that would otherwise be centrally located and crucial to the cell's survival) do prokaryotic cells lack?
nucleus

What is the outer layer of an axon that acts like a layer of insulation, similar to the plastic that encases an electrical cord?
myelin sheath

What occurs when some members of a species become geographically separated?
allopatric speciation

What creatures evolved from a lobe-finned lungfish ancestor?
amphibians

What is the term for a mixture of two or more substances that has the same composition throughout?
solution

What are flagellate protozoa that cause giardiasis?
giardia

Rna and dna are types of what biochemical compounds containing the elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus?
nucleic acids

What are the contacts between neurons called?
synapses

What is the color of the powder of a mineral?
streak

What basic plant structure facilitates dispersal of pollen and fruit by raising reproductive structures?
stem

What type of compound is essential to life?
water

Which part of the ear amplifies the sound waves?
middle ear

The shape of a virus is determined by the type and arrangement of proteins in its what?
capsid

What is the rising and sinking of warm and cooler material called?
convection

What is a group of connected cells that have a similar function within an organism called?
tissue

The number of what subatomic particles can vary between atoms of the same element?
neutrons

Water is recycled constantly through which system?
the ecosystem

The process in which organ systems work to maintain a stable internal environment is called what?
homeostasis

What do scientist's believe mercury's core is mostly made of?
melted iron

What material comprises the sun and other stars, as well as lightning and the northern lights?
plasma

The function of which organ is to filter blood and form urine?
kidneys

The attraction between all objects in the universe is known as ______.
gravity

Friction causes the molecules on rubbing surfaces to move faster, which produces what?
heat

The cell wall acts as an extra layer of protection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and prevents what?
dehydration

What's another term for egg-laying mammals?
monotremes

What code is the same in all living things and shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor?
genetic

All animals that derive energy from food are classified as what?
heterotrophs

Through which process is the human gene for insulin placed into bacteria?
transformation

What is a symbiotic relationship in which both species benefit?
mutualism

What is the term for longer chains of monosaccharides ?
polysaccharides

Electrical potential energy can be described by the equation pe = qv, where q is the electric charge and v is what?
voltage

What are broad explanations that are widely accepted as true?
scientific theories

What process is at work when warm air or water rises, and cool air or water sinks?
convection

If force is applied further away from a pivot point, than what kind of acceleration will be greater?
angular

The kinetic-molecular theory as it applies to gases has how many basic assumptions?
five

During photosynthesis, what is energy from the sun converted to after entering a plant?
glucose

Formic acid is found in the secretions of?
stinging ants

What do hydrophilic substances have an affinity for?
water

What is a structure that consists of two or more types of tissues that work together to do the same job?
organ

What is formed when amino acids are linked together in a long chain?
protein

Both diffusion and effusion are related to the speed at which what objects move?
gas molecules

Baroreceptors in the aortic arch and carotid sinuses monitor what level in the body?
blood pressure

The electronegativity of an element increases with increasing of what state?
oxidation

Animals require air, water, and what in order to live and survive?
food?

How many types of bosons are there?
four

What astronomical phenomenon, formed of split asteroids or planetary rocks, provides clues about our solar system?
meteorites

An electron possesses both particle and these?
wave properties

What are mutant versions of normal genes called?
proto-oncogenes

The heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body make up what organ system?
cardiovascular system

When a predator kills and eats its prey, what sort of predation is this referred to as?
true

Pressure, volume, and temperature are related by which law?
gas law

Different forms, or allotropes, of carbon are diamond, graphite, and what?
fullerenes

What is the process in which organisms reproduce sexually by joining gametes called?
fertilization

What is the force of attraction between things that have mass
gravity

Mitosis and meiosis are two types of what process, with dramatically different products?
cell division

Zinc reacting with hydrochloric acid produces bubbles of which gas?
hydrogen

Water gains and loses what more slowly than does land, affecting seasonal conditions inland and on the coast?
heat

Covalent solutes separate into what when dissolved?
individual molecules

What term indicates moles per liter, whereas molality is moles per kilogram of solvent?
molarity

Many of the hormones are secreted in response to what signals of the body?
nervous system signals

What are two of the most common vision problems?
nearsightedness and farsightedness

Hydrochloric acid is formed when hcl is dissolved into what?
water

Atoms of the same element that have different masses are called what?
isotopes

What term is used to describe potential energy due to an object’s shape?
elastic potential energy

What property is characterized by eddies and swirls that mix layers of fluid together, unlike laminar flow?
turbulence

What process refers to a separation of charge within an atom or molecule?
polarization

What is the largest cartilaginous fish?
whale shark

Capillaries in the chorionic villi filter fetal wastes out of the blood and return clean, oxygenated blood to the fetus through what?
umbilical vein

What is the term for a random change in allele frequencies that occurs in a small population?
genetic drift

Aerobic exercise helps improve the cardiovascular system, while what exercise causes muscles to get bigger and stronger?
anaerobic

An excessive posterior curvature of the thoracic region is also known as what?
kyphosis

What are the two main divisions of the human nervous system?
central and peripheral

What is composed of two strands of nucleotides in a double-helical structure?
dna

The body is made up of how many types of tissue?
four

The great astronomer edwin hubble discovered that all distant galaxies are receding from our milky way galaxy with velocities proportional to their what?
distances

What is friction that acts on objects while it is rolling over a surface called?
rolling friction

Traditionally, mammals were divided into groups based on what?
their characteristics

What type of bonds do alkanes only contain?
carbon-carbon single bonds

Which part of the wave helps make the wave bend and cause refraction?
shallow part

What are passed from one generation to the next so species can survive?
adaptatioins

What kind of lines does a diffraction grating produce?
evenly spaced lines

Which type of ferns have yellow sporangia and no leaves?
whisk ferns

Ice masses, acquifers, and the deep ocean are examples of water what?
reservoirs

This heat is used to convert water into steam, which is then used to turn a turbine, thus generating what?
electrical power

What atmospheric layer lies above the highest altitude an airplane can go and below the lowest altitude a spacecraft can orbit?
mesosphere

Where are sensors for thermoregulation concentrated in the brain?
the hypothalamus

What is the first step in the breakdown of glucose to extract energy for cellular metabolism?
glycolysis

What charge do atoms carry?
neutral

The pleura that surrounds the lungs consists of how many layers?
two

Organisms that obtain food from outside themselves (i.e. they don't make their own food) are known as what?
heterotrophs

In scientific investigations, descriptive statistics are useful for summarizing the characteristics of large what?
samples

The process of the cytoplasm splitting apart and the cell pinching in two is known as what?
cytokinesis

What kind of mountainous formation can often be found near trenches?
volcanoes

Because it can be controlled intentionally, skeletal muscle is also called what type of muscle?
voluntary

What effect in the atmosphere ensures that the earth maintains the correct temperature to support life?
greenhouse effect

Felsic, intermediate, mafic, and ultramafic are types of composition of what rock group?
igneous

What is the base of nearly all food chains on earth?
photosynthesis

The skull is a part of a vertebrate endoskeleton that encloses and protects what organ?
brain

The global pattern of precipitation is influenced by movements of what?
air masses

What is the name of the region of a magnet that has the most pull?
pole

How many major forces of elevation cause allele frequencies to change?
four

Where in the atom is a neutron found?
the nucleus

In physics, what is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles of matter?
temperature

What organelles are known as the "power plants" of the cell?
mitochondria

Dalton's law and henry's law both describe aspects of what type of exchange?
gas

What vesicles store neurotransmitters?
synaptic

What temperature scale is obtained by adding 273 degrees from the corresponding celsius temperature?
kelvin scale

Hemoglobin is a large molecule made up of proteins and iron. it consists of four folded chains of a protein called this?
globin

A new species is said to have evolved if separated members of a species evolve genetic differences that prevent what from occurring with the original members??
interbreeding

What term describes the orientation of a body lying face-down?
prone

What happens to energy when an atom gains an electron?
it is released

What is the name of the second most electronegative element?
oxygen

What is the term for species evolving together?
coevolution

Where do the eggs develop?
the ovaries

What's the other term for your wind pipe?
trachea

When food is scarce, starving cells secrete a molecule that stimulates neighboring cells to do what?
aggregate

What do cells secrete that binds to receptors?
factor

What is the term for the tube that carries sound waves into the ear?
ear canal

In the cardiovascular system, what blood vessels carry blood away from the heart?
arteries

Molecules in the gas phase can collide with the liquid surface and reenter the liquid via what?
condensation

What guards the opening between the right atrium and the right ventricle?
tricuspid valve

The water cycle involves movement of water between air and what?
land

When we consider a chemical reaction, we need to take into account both the system and what?
sorroundings

What is a layer of tissue that lies between the shell and the body?
mantle

In what country can some of the largest natural crystals be found?
mexico

What are the primary producers in terrestrial biomes?
plants

Where are aerofoils found?
birds and airplanes

What is the si unit for pressure?
pascal

Marine fishes take in divalent ions by incessantly drinking what?
seawater

The simplest and smallest particle of matter that still has chemical properties of the element is called?
an atom

Frequency and intensity are two measurable properties of what?
wave

While most mammals give birth to live young, monotremes can do what?
lay eggs

What happens to old oceanic crust at convergent boundaries?
destroyed

When electrons are shared between two atoms, they make a bond called a what?
covalent bond

What happens to the temperature of matter as light is absorbed?
it increases

By shocking ocean water, earthquakes can cause what deadly ocean waves?
tsunamis

Where are the desmosome found in a cell?
epithelium

An action potential that starts at the axon hillock moves along the axon only toward what?
the synaptic terminals

Fission is a type of radioactivity in which large nuclei spontaneously break apart into what?
smaller nuclei

Bones are the main organs of what system, which also includes cartilage and ligaments?
skeletal system

Most waves strike the shore at an angle. this causes what?
longshore drift

What is the difference between the daily high and the daily low?
tidal change

Spermatogonia are the stem cells of what male sex organs?
testes

Sensory neurons transmit nerve impulses from sense organs and internal organs to the brain via the?
spinal cord

Sexually reproducing organisms alternate between which stages?
haploid and diploid

Acids turn blue litmus paper which color?
red

The development of a head region is called what?
cephalization

Which hormone helps cells absorb sugar from the blood?
insulin

What is the number of electrons equal to in every electrically neutral atom?
protons

Does climate change have a positive or negative effect on reproductive success?
negative

What is the most common form of dwarfism in humans?
achondroplasia

What is the term for groups of three successive nucleotide bases in dna?
triplets

The coccyx, or tailbone, results from the fusion of four small what?
coccygeal vertebrae

What is a pure substance that cannot be separated into any other substances called?
element

How many different types of stresses are there?
four

A molecule has two structures that can be generated. what is this called?
isomerism

An antigen is a molecule that reacts with some component of the what response?
immune

What bodily system is primarily responsible for fighting pathogens in the body?
immune

Displacement, velocity, acceleration, and force are examples of what type of quantity that has magnitude and direction?
vector

Gases such as co2 and methane can trap what energy in earth's atmosphere, before radiating it into space?
thermal energy

What happens when heated water is released into a body of water?
thermal pollution

What term is used to describe a chemical released by an animal that affects the behavior or physiology of animals of the same species?
pheromone

Producers at the base of ecological food webs are also known as?
autotrophic

What is the term for the gas in smog that can damage plants?
ozone

What must happen for two ions to form an ionic bond?
two ions need to have opposite charges

What is the study of the similarities and differences in the embryos of different species?
comparative embryology

What are the main organs of the respiratory system?
lungs

What do you call the traits that allow a plant, animal, or other organism to survive and reproduce in its environment?
adaptations

The products of photosynthesis are glucose and what else?
oxygen

In what way do bacteria reproduce?
binary fission

What type of fibers are made mostly of protein in living things?
muscle fibers

What force is responsible for erosion by flowing water and glaciers?
gravity

Nearly all protists exist in some type of aquatic environment, including freshwater and marine environments, damp soil, and even snow. several protist species are parasites that infect animals or plants. a few protist species live on dead organisms or their wastes, and contribute to what?
their decay

What type of rocks form from cooled magma or lava?
igneous

What kind of cells have positive cell potentials, and all the reduction reactions are reversible?
galvanic cells

A fish's stream-lined body that reduces water resistance is an example of what kind of response to an aquatic lifestyle?
adaptation

Emissions of what gas into the atmosphere from fossil fuel burning have been rising for the past several decades?
carbon dioxide

Gymnosperms have seeds but do not have what?
flowers

Modern members of what broad animal group live in many different habitats and are found on every continent except antarctica?
reptiles

The right ventricle pumps what type of blood toward the lungs?
oxygen-poor

Some 96% of the dry mass consists of organic compounds produced by what?
photosynthesis

What is it called when something is unable to move from place to place?
sessile

What waves are the broad range of electromagnetic waves with the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies?
radio

What are the two main types of sedimentary rocks?
clastic and chemical

Light waves which interfere with themselves after interaction with a small aperture or target are said to what?
diffract

Distance traveled divided by time yields what measurement, which is another word used to describe the speed of a chemical reaction?
rate

Beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, and barium are classified as what type of metals?
alkaline earth metals

Common among mammals and insects, pheromones are often related to what type of behavior?
reproductive

Neutron stars are the corpses of left over what?
supernova explosions

In recent years, however, researchers have discovered that microsporidia actually have tiny organelles derived from what?
mitochondria

The negative logarithm of the hydroxide-ion concentration of a solution is called?
the poh

What is the greatest contribution of arthropods to human food supply?
pollination

What kind of weather change do la nina years usually bring?
drought

In physics, _______ is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object?
temperature

What are proteins encoded by?
genes

In alcoholic fermentation , which acid changes to alcohol and carbon dioxide?
pyruvic

What is another term for scale worms?
halkieria

What type of device do scientist use to determine wind speed?
anemometer

Which constellation looks like a rectangle high in winter's south-southeastern sky?
orion

What mammal is often a pollinator of nocturnal flowers?
bat

What can reproduce by infecting the cell of a living host?
virus

The theory that establishes the concepts of atoms and how they compose matter is called what?
modern atomic theory

How does the heart transport blood?
blood vessels

The gender of a baby is determined by what special pair of chromosomes?
sex chromosomes

What does the activity of an organism depend on the totality of?
independent cells

What is solid water that forms when water vapor undergoes deposition?
frost

What gets released into the atmosphere when fossil fuels are burned?
carbon dioxide

What is the term for the measure of a fluid's thickness?
viscosity

Plant cells have structures that animal cells?
lack

What reduces the need for pesticides and other toxic chemicals?
fungi

Matter can be described with what two encompassing types of properties?
physical and chemical

When the number of active receptors falls below that threshold, what happens to the cellular response?
it ceases

Types of neurons include sensory neurons, motor neurons, and?
interneurons

Active and passive forms of what enable the body to resist damage from pathogens?
immunity

What is the energy of motion called?
kinetic energy

What is the term for an infection caused by a fungal parasite?
mycosis

What do you call the ability to sense sound energy and perceive sound?
hearing

Some plants can detect increased levels of what when reflected from leaves of encroaching neighbors?
light

What are the  high points of a transverse wave called?
crests

What is the transfer of heat by a current?
convection

When acellular slime molds swarm, they fuse together to form a single cell with many what?
nuclei

Potential energy is not only associated with the location of matter, but also with the structure of matter. even a spring on the ground has potential energy if it is what?
compressed

What is the name of film that polyester fibers form?
mylar

Where do germline mutations occur in?
in gametes

What a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid?
aqua regia

Most members of what kingdom of spore-making organisms grow on the forest floor, where the dark and damp environment is rich?
fungi

What results when the water vapor from a hot shower contacts the cooler surface of a mirror?
foggy mirror

What type of vascular plants produce seeds in cones?
gymnosperms

In fruit flies, all homeotic genes are found on one what?
chromosome

Certain medications can suppress the immune system. this is an intended effect of drugs given to people with what?
transplanted organs

The geometry of the bf 3 molecule is called what?
trigonal planar

In multicellular organisms, mutations can be subdivided into germline mutations and?
somatic mutations

What is the name for a biologist who studies fungi?
mycologists

How many different kinds of ions are produced when sodium chloride dissociates ?
two

What mineral is made of one silicon atom and two oxygen atoms?
quartz

How many cycles do cells have?
four

Gas particles can move randomly in what directions?
all directions

The total number of protons and neutorns in an atom is called what?
mass number

All matter is composed of tiny indivisible particles called atoms. all atoms of an element are identical in mass and this?
chemical properties

Where do lightnings build up?
clouds

What do we call zeros that appear after nonzero digits?
right-end zeros

What term is used to describe a bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in an end-to-end fashion, with the electron density concentrated between the nuclei of the bonding atoms?
sigma bond

According to count rumford, which two are equivalent ways of transferring energy?
heat and work

What type of radio waves exist in the 540 to 1600 khz frequency range?
am radio waves

What type of cells make up about one quarter of all white blood cells?
lymphocytes

The mass of the objects and the distance between them affect the strength of what universal force?
gravity

Without the dominant disturbance, the fire-adapted species are usually outcompeted and biodiversity is what?
reduced

Constantly going through some form of growth and repair is a characteristic of all what?
living things

Positive charges move in the direction of the electric field and the same direction as what current?
conventional current

Redox reactions, like other chemical reactions, begin with a product and end with what?
reactant

How does alcohol expand over a wide range of temperatures?
uniformly

How many years ago may the earliest fungi have evolved?
600 million

What are the bones in partly movable joints held in place by?
cartilage

Sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels are what kind of organs?
floral

How do most growing plant cells expand?
through water uptake

What is the common term for the chemical formula h 2 0?
water

What kind of reaction is needed to prepare amides?
carboxylic acid reaction

What is the process by which the egg is fertilized by the pollen of the same flower?
self pollination

In moss, what becomes elongated to elevate the capsule to enhance spore dispersal?
seta

What is the base unit that frequency is typically measured in?
hertz

Controlling muscles and maintaining balance are just two of the roles of what system?
nervous system

Displacement divided by time is equal to the average what?
velocity

The complete hydrolysis of starch yields what?
glucose

What term describes an imbalance of attractive forces between liquid molecules at the surface of a liquid?
surface tension

In mammals, four specialized types of what serve to cut, tear, and grind food?
teeth

Atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease are examples of what type of body system disease?
cardiovascular system

When cats mark their territory by rubbing their face against an object, they deposit chemicals released by what structures?
scent glands

Like other bryophytes, moss plants spend most of their life cycle as?
gametophytes

What is a benefit of low sulfur coal over high sulfur coal?
less pollution

Wings of bats and birds serve the same function. which body part should you study to understand ancestral differences?
bones inside wings

The best thermal conductors are also the best conductors of what, which is also related to the density of free electrons in them?
electricity

What tissue do clubmosses have that mosses do not?
vascular tissue

The average human body contains 5,830 g of what?
blood

What type of speciation occurs when groups from the same species are geographically isolated for long periods?
allopatric

What can damage the hair cells lining the cochlea of the inner ear?
loud sounds

The boiling point of a solution is higher than the boiling point of the pure solvent, but the opposite occurs with this?
freezing point

What is the network of vessels and tissues that carry a clear fluid called lymph called?
lymphatic system

What is defined as the change of water from its liquid phase to its gaseous phase?
evaporation

Radiation, chemicals, and infectious agents are types of what?
mutagens

What type of matter transmits light without scattering it?
transparent

Steam actually consists of tiny droplets of liquid what?
water

What mammalian class has the greatest ability to learn?
humans

What is the part of the cardiovascular system that carries oxygen-rich blood away from the heart, to the body, and returns oxygen-poor blood back to the heart?
systemic circulation

What causes polarization in a neutral object?
separation of charges

Cells in blood include red blood cells, white blood cells, and what?
platelets

What substance is created when a copper turns from reddish brown to greenish brown?
copper oxide

The egg shell membrane encloses the nucleus containing the genetic material and what?
cytoplasm

According to dalton's law, unless they chemically react with each other, individual gases in a mixture of gases do not affect each other’s what?
pressure

How many mass distinctions have radically altered the history of life?
five

The vector sum of all the torques acting on an object is called what?
net torque

What determines how strongly an atom attracts electrons to itself?
electronegativity

Looking directly at what celestial object can cause blindness?
sun

The amount of kinetic energy in a moving object depends directly on what two factors?
mass and velocity

What is the movement of fluid out of the capillaries called?
filtration

The prevalence of cervical cancer in the united states is very low because of regular screening exams called what?
pap smears

There is a predictable amount of solute that can be dissolved at what?
specific temperature

Carrier proteins bind and carry the molecules across what cell structure?
cell membrane

As per hutton's unconformity, what happened to the intermediate layers of rock?
they eroded away

What kind of summers do humid continental climates have?
cold summers

Compared to others, what type of liquid has a relatively high surface tension and heat capacity?
water

Cilia and flagella are extensions of what?
plasma membrane

Mercury and lead, which was once widely used in paint and gasoline, are examples of what type of metals?
toxic heavy metals

During karyogamy, the haploid nuclei contributed by the two parents fuse, which produces what?
diploid cells

What is polyisoprene better known as?
rubber

Every chemical reaction occurs with a concurrent change in what?
energy

What receives blood in the heart?
the atria

Fatty acids, triglycerides, phospholipids, and steroids are examples of what?
lipids

Where in the cell does photosynthesis occur?
chloroplast

Sympathetic stimulation also triggers the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine, which enhance both cardiac output and what else?
vasoconstriction

Not surprisingly, centipedes, millipedes and other members of the subphylum myriapoda are adapted to living on what?
land

What are found in moist forests that break down decaying plant material?
myriapoda

By breaking down wastes and remains of dead organisms, decomposers perform what function in an ecosystem?
recycling

What are sugars broken down into in your digestive system?
glucose

Approximately how many weeks does the fetal period last?
30 weeks

Because dizygotic twins develop from two eggs fertilized by two sperm, they are no more identical than siblings born at what?
different times

What is the plasma membrane mainly composed of?
phospholipids

Astronomers have wondered if the universe is expanding fast enough to escape the pull of what?
gravity

When someone falls, the kinetic energy the person has upon reaching the floor is the amount of what energy lost by falling through height?
potential energy

What are protons and neutrons that make up the nucleus of an atom called?
nucleons

The sun, stars, moon, planets and comets are all type of what objects?
celestrial

What is the total number of codons?
64

Solution nodes and antinodes are both areas of wave interference, but they differ in the presence of what condition?
motion

While similar to insects, what eight-legged invertebrates lack antennae or wings?
arachnids

How many chromosomes do mature gametes contain?
23

What is the term for land that has permanently frozen soil?
permafrost

When sparks from a steel grinder react with oxygen, what do they form?
iron oxide

What should you learn that allows you to recognize and avoid the dangers of specific hazards when experimenting, such as flames or broken glass?
lab safety symbols

Motor vehicles account for almost half of the consumption of what?
fossil fuel

Bacterial stis can be cured with what?
antibiotics

Fats are also called triacylglycerols or triglycerides because of their what?
chemical structure

What mammalian structure allows the exchange of gases, nutrients, and other substances between the fetus and mother?
placenta

Fossil fuel consumption is a major contributor to global emissions of what gas?
carbon dioxide

What is the main function of blood?
to transport

Biotechnology is the use of biological agents for technological advancement. what two areas are the primary applications of this technology used?
medicine and agriculture

Unlike free-living species of flatworms that are predators or scavengers, what forms feed from the tissues of their hosts?
parasitic

When heat flows into an object, its thermal energy increases and so does its what?
temperature

What are telescopes that use lenses to bend light called?
refracting telescopes

The science of analyzing tree rings is called what?
dendrochronology

Which type of arthritis causes the immune system to attack joints?
rheumatoid

A species is a subdivision of a genus in what classification system?
linnaean system

What is the force that pulls particles at the exposed surface of a liquid toward other liquid particles called?
surface tension

What state is achieved when the body's internal environment is kept more-or-less constant?
homeostasis

Kinetic and potential are two forms of what?
energy

Humans are unique in their ability to alter their environment with the conscious purpose of increasing what, which acts as a limiting factor on populations in general?
carrying capacity

A desmosome is a cell structure that anchors the ends of what fibers together?
cardiac muscle

How much space a surface covers is known as what?
area

What do aquatic arthropods use to exchange gases?
gills

What kind of rays can travel thousands of meters through air and can penetrate and damage cells deep inside the body?
gamma rays

Of the three types of skeleton designs - hydrostatic skeletons, exoskeletons, and endoskeletons - which do humans possess?
endoskeleton

What regulates homeostasis and basic survival behaviors?
hypothalamus

What device changes kinetic energy to electrical energy through electromagnetic induction?
electric generator

What are two nonliving things that all living things need for survival?
water and air

The fight or flight response involves what system?
autonomic nervous system

How many types of galaxies are there?
three

Skin color is controlled by genes but also influenced by exposure to what?
sunlight

Higher temperatures increase the rate of reaction in a lot of chemical reactions because they increase the frequency of what interaction between reactant particles?
collisions

Knees and elbows are examples of what part of the skeletal system?
joints

Einstein’s equation helps scientists understand what happens in nuclear reactions and why they produce so much what?
energy

Ovulation is the release of an egg from the what?
ovary

The process in which the nucleus divides is called what?
mitosis

What is used to recrystallize excess dissolved solute in a supersaturated solution?
seed crystal

Our bodies use what, primarily in the form of glucose, for our immediate energy needs - although they are not as energy dense or capable of long-term storage as lipids?
carbohydrates

What part of the body do ants use to detect chemicals?
antennae

Water has the properties of cohesion and what else?
adhesion

Fitness and natural selection are parts of what theory that might describe how organisms change over time?
evolution

What three forces are involved in erosion?
water, wind, gravity

Thermodynamics do not give us any insight into what attribute of spontaneous processes?
rate

What is the main source of hydrocarbons?
fossil fuels

What is the process of the blastula forming 3 layers of cells called?
gastrulation

How does air pressure change as altitude increases?
it decreases

In harmonic motion there is always what force, which acts in the opposite direction of the velocity?
restorative force

Many of the protist species classified into the supergroup excavata are asymmetrical, single-celled organisms with a feeding groove “excavated” from one side. this supergroup includes heterotrophic predators, photosynthetic species, and these?
parasites

What is the thick fluid in the space between bones that cushions the joint?
synovial fluid

What is the name of the portion of a nucleotide lacking phosphate groups?
a nucleoside

The band disappears before metaphase but predicts the future plane of what?
cell division

What is a common age-related bone disease in which bone density and strength is decreased?
osteoporosis

Bacteria reproduce through what process?
binary fission

What is the branch of science that studies the physical world?
physics

Osteoclasts break down bone to maintain mineral what?
homeostatis

Which carbohydrates can be classified in terms of chain length?
simple

What is altered by changes in cardiac output by variable contriction of the arterioles?
blood pressure

Eukaryotic cells are cells that contain what?
a nucleus

What distinctive dna shape forms when the two nucleotide chains wrap around the same axis?
double helix

The oxygen regions of the water molecules have what kind of charge?
negative

Humans use many compounds that were first discovered or derived from living organisms as medicines: secondary plant compounds, animal toxins, and antibiotics produced by these?
bacteria and fungi

Millipedes and centipedes are the most commonly found examples of what group of arthropods?
subphylum myriapoda

Glass breaking is an example of what type of change that doesn't affect the makeup of matter?
physical

Aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters, and ethers all have functional groups containing what element?
oxygen

What forms when an atom gains electrons?
anions

There are several types of wetlands including marshes, swamps, bogs, mudflats, and salt marshes. the three shared characteristics among these types—what makes them wetlands—are their hydrology, hydrophytic vegetation, and this?
hydric soils

What element is typically used to shield things from gamma rays?
lead

What is the combination of tissues that provides a tough, woody external covering on the stems of trees called?
bark

Because microorganisms can go through several generations in a matter of hours, their gene expression profiles adapt to the new laboratory environment very quickly. in addition, the vast majority of bacterial species resist being cultured in this?
isolation

Examples of acute forms of what type of diseases include the common cold and influenza?
viral diseases

What do red blood cells carry?
oxygen

The sympathetic division of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system has evolved the fight-or-flight response to counter stress-induced disruptions of this?
homeostasis

What light-producing process occurs when a substance absorbs shorter-wavelength ultraviolet light and then gives off the energy as visible light?
fluorescence

What lies between the continental shelf and the abyssal plain?
continental slope

In the first beaker, distilled water does not conduct a current because water is a what?
molecular compound

What is another term for hydraulic fracturing?
fracking

In what unit is speed usually measured?
miles per hour

Unlike liver bile, 'juice' produced by what organ is clear and composed mostly of water along with some salts, sodium bicarbonate, and digestive enzymes?
pancreas

What term means opposition to the flow of electric charges that occurs when electric current travels through matter?
resistance

According to law, what must packaged foods carry?
nutrition facts label

What type of terminal releases neurotransmitters at a synapse?
axon

What chemical affects the onset of puberty and duration?
hormones

What are the only plants with a life cycle in which the gametophyte generation is dominant?
nonvascular

What do angiosperms produce?
flowers and fruit

What should you let liquid waste do before placing the container in the trash?
evaporate

Mammoths, close genetic relatives of modern elephants, are believed to have gone extinct due to hunting by humans and what factor?
climate change

What is the ph level of neutral, pure water?
seven

Which organ system defends the body from pathogens and other causes of disease?
immune system

What is the process where scientific articles are checked and analyzed by other scientists before publication?
peer review

A mutation is a random change in an organism's what?
genes

Synovial and ball-and-socket are both types of what?
joints

Who invented dynamite in 1866?
alfred nobel

Most liquid freshwater is under the ground in layers of what?
rock

What phenotype do gain-of-function mutations usually result in?
dominant

What occurs if oxygen cannot be obtained at a sufficient rate?
anaerobic respiration

What are the key to species evolving?
mutations

Cancer develops when what process is unregulated?
cell division

What are needed to oxidize the noble gases to form compounds in positive oxidation states?
potent oxidants

Which muscles raise the hyoid bone, the floor of the mouth, and the larynx during deglutition?
suprahyoid

What type of energy is stored in an object because of its position or shape?
potential

Like plants, animals are multicellular what?
eukaryotes

A doorknob and a ferris wheel are examples of what type of simple machine?
wheel and axle

What do ocean mollusks use to absorb oxygen from the water?
gills

What is paleobotany?
study of extinct plants

What happens to the level of relative humidity in the evening as air temperature declines?
it rises

What term is used to describe a compound that does not conduct an electric current in either aqueous solution or in the molten state?
nonelectrolyte

Peregrine falcons made an incredible recovery after laws were passed banning the use of what?
ddt

What pathway in a plant do water and nutrients travel through from the roots to the leaves?
stem

In the tropics what are the prevailing winds called?
tradewinds

How many chromosomes are in a diploid human cell?
46 chromosomes

Motion of water molecules helps break up interactions between what?
solid ions or molecules

Which cycle is named after the scientist melvin calvin?
calvin cycle

What is formed when a subducting plate flows under another tectonic plate?
volcanic arc

What force increases a slide downhill and decreases a slide uphill?
gravity

Lymphoma is a cancer of a type of what type of cells, called lymphocytes?
white blood cells

What type of eggs do fully terrestrial vertebrates carry?
amniotic

What is the time since the beginning of the ice ages?
quaternary period

What will the contraction of smooth muscles help organs do?
carry out functions

What is an acid that can be produced from the aerobic fermentation of wine?
vinegar

Weathering is fundamental to the creation of what, which exists as a very thin layer over solid rock?
soil

What type of weathering causes the minerals in a rock to change?
chemical

What is the process in which a liquid changes to a solid?
freezing

By pulling out grass by its roots and over-grazing, livestock contribute to what negative process?
erosion

What are the three types of isomers?
structural, cis-trans, enatiomers

The chloroplasts contain a green pigment called what?
chlorophyll

What state occurs when the amount of solute dissolved exceeds the solubility?
supersaturation

What occurs when spores from two parents fuse and form a zygospore?
sexual reproduction

Macrophages and dendritic cells are types of what"
phagocytic cells

What side of a mountain does the rainshadow effect occur on?
the leeward side

Centrioles are a very important part of what?
centrosomes

What is the volume of the molecules of an ideal gas?
zero

What part of the body are eggs formed in?
ovaries

What is the first digestive organ that food enters?
mouth

Soda fizzes when what common gas comes out of solution?
carbon dioxide

The voltage and current are exactly in phase in a what?
resistor

Combining the voltages of the oxidation and reduction half reactions helps to determine what?
voltage

What occurs when an unstable nucleus emits a beta particle and energy?
beta decay

A chemical property describes the ability of a substance to undergo a specific what?
chemical change

When energy is captured or transformed, it inevitably degrades and becomes what less useful form of energy?
heat

The periodic table is one of the cornerstones of chemistry because it organizes all the known elements on the basis of their what?
chemical properties

What organs filter wastes from blood so they can be excreted from the body?
kidneys

The tidal forces near what celestial phenomena are so great they can actually tear matter from a companion star?
black holes

What are female gonads normally called?
ovaries

Starch and glycogen, as well as simple sugars like glucose and fructose, can all be categorized broadly as what?
carbohydrates

Lipids are biochemical compounds such as fats and?
oils

What is the process of small molecules passing through the plasma membrane called?
diffusion

What change the physical properties of solvents?
solutes

Which human body system is a complex network of nervous tissue that carries electrical messages throughout the body?
the nervous system

What is a sheet of muscle that spreads across the bottom of the rib cage?
diaphragm

What creates charged regions in a water molecule?
polar covalent bonds

Phosphorus exists as several allotropes, the most common being red, black, and what?
white phosphorus

What is the term for environmental causes of mutations?
mutagens

How are classic sedimentary rocks group?
size of sediment

How many eyelid membranes do frogs have?
three

What is another word for saturated hydrocarbons?
alkanes

Where is the pressure of gases in the atmosphere at its greatest?
sea level

What strong and lightweight manmade material is derived from hydrocarbons and used in ropes, tents and parachutes?
nylon

What is the third male reprodutive structure after the penis and testes?
epididymis

What are considered solid lipids that animals use to store energy?
fats

The small, egg-shaped organs that lie on either side of the uterus are called?
ovaries

Which competition leads to one species going extinct or both becoming more specialized?
interspecific

Who discovered that the andromeda nebula is over 2 million light years away
edwin hubble

What does every star emit that humans cannot see?
radiation

What type pf mining is used to obtain mineral ores that are near the surface?
surface mining

The external female reproductive structures are referred to collectively as what?
the vulva

Acid rain may be caused by what?
air pollution

What process is used to chemically and mechanically break down the food you eat into smaller parts?
digestion

What is the study of matter and the changes that material substances undergo.
chemistry

What occurs when the presence or absence of a specific behavior prevents reproduction from taking place?
behavioral isolation

Why have rivers in arid regions been reduced to trickles?
diversion of water

Having extra chromosomes or damaged chromosomes can cause what?
disorders

What do farmers use greenhouses for?
to extend the growing season

What is it called when two waves in the same medium pass one another?
interference

Which forests are found throughout the ocean in temperate and arctic climates?
kelp

What is the type of cancer in which bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells that cannot fight infections?
leukemia

Mechanical energy can also usually be expressed as the sum of kinetic energy and what other kind of energy?
potential energy

What kind of bonds are forces of attraction between positive metal ions and the valence electrons that are constantly moving around them?
metallic bonds

Aldehydes and ketones can work weak hydrogen bonds with water through what atom?
carbonyl oxygen atom

Asexual reproduction in plants is typically an extension of the capacity for what?
indeterminate growth

A type of what in a cow's gut enables the animal to digest grass?
bacteria

What basic structures are called the building blocks of life and comprise all living things?
cells

What kind of behavior occurs only after experience or practice and describes most human behaviors?
learned behavior

What is the study of the interaction between matter and energy called?
chemistry

Prescribed to treat allergies, antihistamines and corticosteroids help control what system that attacks allergens?
immune system

The main advantage of urea is its very low what?
toxicity

What type of blood cells transport oxygen to the tissues so they can function?
red blood cells

What title is used to describe health professionals who use nonsurgical techniques to help patients with musculoskeletal system problems that involve the bones, muscles, ligaments, tendons, or nervous system?
chiropractor chiropractors

Flowers pollinated by what means generally lack brightly colored parts?
wind

Fog disappears when the water droplets change back to what?
water vapor

What is the name of the type of combustion engine that you would find in a car?
internal combustion engine

What must molecules have to be cis-trans isomers?
double bond

In physics, work means the use of what to move an object?
force

Types of radiation that cause cancer include ultraviolet (uv) radiation and what?
radon

How many calories of energy does one gram of sugar or starch provide?
4

Defecating, urination, and even childbirth involve cooperation between the diaphragm and these?
abdominal muscles

When we move down a group of elements on the periodic table, what happens to their electronegativity?
it decreases

What two elements do chloroplasts split water into?
hydrogen and oxygen

Continuous-flow reactors are chemical reaction vessels in which the what are mixed and allowed to react as they flow along a tube?
reactants

What is it called when one or more ending digits are dropped to get the correct number of significant figures?
rounding

Hair sticks out from the epidermis, but it grows from the?
dermis

The milky way galaxy is which shape type of galaxy?
spiral

Atmospheric pressure is low in what anatomically named part of a hurricane?
eye

What occurs when a substance diffuses through a cell membrane without any help from other molecules?
simple diffusion

Sodium and chloride ions have equal but what charges?
opposite

What is making measurements that are close to the true value known as?
accuracy

What are muscle cells in the muscles called?
muscle fibers

What term means the minimum energy required in order for a collision between molecules to result in a chemical reaction?
activation energy

What term is used to describe the change in size or volume of a given mass with temperature?
thermal expansion

What are created based upon the loss or gain of electrons?
ions

All atoms of the same element have the same number of what?
protons

What kind of chain is formed by subduction of oceanic crust beneath a continental or oceanic plate?
volcano

Which kinds of cells have nuclei and other membrane bound organelles?
eukaryotes

What regulates the thyroid gland in a body?
negative feedback loop

Females of what mammalian group have mammary glands but lack nipples?
monotreme

What helps fungus digest cellulose and other materials found in rotting matter?
enzymes

In what form of lipids cells store energy for long-term use?
fat

What is used to fluoridate drinking water to promote dental health
calcium fluoride

Light reactions also release oxygen gas as a what?
waste product

What is the term for rain that has a ph less than 5, due to carbon dioxide dissolving?
acid rain

What gas is released into the atmosphere when fossil fuels are burned?
co2

What are the most energetic of all electromagnetic waves, which can be used to treat cancer?
gamma rays

When does a baby double in length and triple in weight?
infancy

Where do the cells in your body get oxygen from?
red blood cells

What type of generations do plants alternate between during a life cycle?
haploid and diploid

Genetic diversity in a population comes from two main sources - sexual reproduction and what else?
mutation

What state of matter completes the list: solid, liquid, gas?
plasma

The heart, blood vessels, and blood make up which system in the body?
cardiovascular

What unit of measurement is typically used for rainfall?
inches

Which elements fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table?
metalloids

What is it called when bones get longer and bigger?
growth

What kind of reactions are involved in processes ranging from the contraction of muscles to the digestion of food?
chemical

Mycorrhizae functions as a physical barrier to what?
pathogens

What do skeletal muscles enable the body to do?
move

What is the sum total of all body reactions?
metabolism

What type of reproduction involves combining genetic material from two parents to create distinct offspring?
sexual reproduction

What kind of molecule is made from one or more long chains of amino acids?
protein molecule

What part of the heart receives the blood is pumped from veins of the systemic circuit?
right atrium

What type of properties are characteristics that describe matter?
physical

What is the leading cause of death in the united states?
heart disease

What results when gas particles rebound off the walls of their container?
pressure

How do most fish reproduce with one another?
sexually

What is the ability to cause changes in matter?
energy

The group 18 gases that have 8 valence electrons are referred to as what type of gases?
noble

Competition is a relationship between organisms that depend on the same resources. the resources might be food, water, or what?
space

What does phagocytosis defend the body from?
pathogens

What measures the force of gravity pulling on an object?
weight

Are coral reefs found in warm or cold water?
warm

In humans, there are five primary tastes, and each taste has only one corresponding type of what?
receptor

The large positive free energy change leads to a value that is extremely what?
small

Slime molds are fungus-like protists that grow as slimy masses on what?
decaying matter

What is the body cavity that reptiles have that is involved in reproduction?
cloaca

What is the germ for a group of atoms within a molecule that reacts similarly anywhere it appears in different compounds?
functional group

During asexual reproduction, fungi produce haploid spores by what process involving a haploid parent cell?
mitosis

In eukaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation takes place in what?
mitochondria

Short chains of two amino acids (dipeptides) or three amino acids (tripeptides) are also transported actively. however, after they enter the absorptive epithelial cells, they are broken down into their amino acids before leaving the cell and entering the capillary blood via what?
diffusion

What do fungi use to penetrate deep into decaying matter?
hyphae

All living cells in multicellular organisms contain an internal cytoplasmic compartment, and a nucleus within the cytoplasm. cytosol, the jelly-like substance within the cell, provides the fluid medium necessary for this?
biochemical reactions

Under appropriate conditions, the attractions between all molecules in what state will cause them to form liquids or solids?
gas

What else besides temperature has an effect on the phase of a substance?
pressure

What type of charge does a neutron have?
neutral or no charge

Animals that molt their exoskeletons belong to which clade?
ecdysozoa

Alkaline earth metals are what color?
silvery grey

What type of movement is caused by erosion from direct gravity?
mass movement

What term is used describe energy released during an earthquake?
magnitude

What are the rolling motions during an earthquake called?
surface waves

What is the process that breaks down rocks into smaller pieces?
weathering

What is the measurement for the amount of water vapor in the air?
humidity

Major exchange pools of carbon include organisms and what else?
the atmosphere

When light is absorbed by a material, what may increase?
its temperature

What branch of physical science looks at how heat, work, and various forms of energy are related to one another?
thermodynamics

Connective tissues typically have three characteristic components in common: cells, large amounts of amorphous ground substance, and what else?
protein fibers

After what stage do the last 2 stages of food  processing occur?
digestion

What part of the plant holds the plant upright?
the stem

What is a circuit that consists of one loop called?
series circuit

Leaves respond to these environmental stimuli by producing less what?
chlorophyll

Mammals that lay eggs are called what?
monotremes

In what ocean is the mid-atlantic ridge located?
atlantic ocean

Models may be physical, conceptual, or what else?
mathematical

What is an organism that spreads bacteria or other pathogens?
vector

What influences the types of plants and animals that inhabit a specific biome?
climate

In the vast majority of ectopic pregnancies, the embryo does not complete its journey to what organ, and instead implants in the uterine tube?
uterus

In a single-celled organism such as chlamydomonas, there is no what after fertilization?
mitosis

Timber, medicines, dyes, oils, and rubber are just some of the useful products humans derive from what?
plants

Differences between organisms reflect differences between their nucleotide sequences rather than between their what?
genetic codes

Lying with their mouths open, a behavior called gaping, probably serves what function for crocodiles?
cooling down

What type of living things break down dead organisms and recycle their nutrients into the soil?
decomposers

When food enters the stomach after a period of fasting, a drop in what initiates the conversion of pepsinogen to pepsin?
ph

Mutations that lead to cancer usually occur in genes that control the cell cycle. these include tumor-suppressor genes and what?
proto-oncogenes

What type of environment is maintained in homeostasis?
constant internal

When calculating impulse, consider the change in _______ of one of the objects in the collision?
momentum

What word describes any chemical that affects the body’s structure or function?
drug

The entry of acidic chyme into the duodenum stimulates the release of what?
secretin

Adulthood is divided into how many stages?
three

What is the single bone that forms the posterior skull and posterior base of the cranial cavity?
occipital bone

Is the progeny produced by asexual reproduction stronger or weaker than seedlings produced by sexual reproduction?
stronger

Supersaturated solutions of most solids in water are prepared by cooling what?
saturated solutions

Bacterial stis usually can be cured with what?
antibiotics

Intensity is defined to be the power per unit area carried by a what?
wave

Trophic level 4 = tertiary consumers that eat what kind of consumers?
secondary consumers

What takes the shape of the container they are placed in and have a definite volume?
liquids

What is produced when a colorless solution of lead nitrate is added to a colorless solution of potassium iodide?
yellow solid precipitate

Due to the difference in the distribution of charge, water is what type of molecule?
polar

What do we call the major artery carrying recently oxygenated blood away from the heart?
aorta

In a model of a hemoglobin molecule, the purple part indicates the presence of what element?
iron

What kind of gland produces an oily substance that waterproofs the hair and skin?
sebaceous gland

Which type of substance is considered a proton donor in a reaction?
acid

What are materials that are good conductors of thermal energy called?
thermal conductors

Why do players with more mass often have a larger impact in football?
momentum is larger

Corals build hard exoskeletons that grow to become what?
coral reefs

What property is the result of force acting on a given area?
pressure

Nervous tissue consists of just two basic types of nerve cells: neurons and?
glial cells

The plasma membrane of a skeletal muscle fiber is called the what?
sarcolemma

What is the force pulling an object downward called?
weight

Which part of all mammals have the same basic bone structure?
forelimbs

The symbol for each what is usually the first letter or two of its name?
element

The only things that affect the period of a simple pendulum are its length and the acceleration due to gravity. the period is completely independent of other factors, such as this?
mass

What is the amide bond that occurs between the amino nitrogen of one amino acid and the carboxyl carbon of another amino acid?
a peptide bond

What encloses the border of animal cells?
plasma membrane

Heterotrophic organisms use organic compounds, usually from other organisms, as a source of what basic element of life?
carbon

Electrons always result in what?
an anion that is larger than the parent atom

The diffusion of water across a membrane because of a difference in concentration is called?
osmosis

Bioluminescence is an example of what type of activity that is carried out by a cell and is precisely coordinated and controlled?
metabolic

What reflex is commonly tested in newborn infants to establish the presence of neuromuscular function?
plantar

All of the monatomic ions have oxidation numbers equal to their?
charges

Unlike plants, animal species rely almost exclusively on what type of reproduction?
sexual reproduction

Give an example of benthos that live near vents on the deep ocean floor.
tubeworms

What is the distinctive shape of the molecule that contains genetic information?
spiral

What is a bread mold and research organism that also grows in the wild on burned vegetation
neurospora

How do most echinoderms reproduce?
sexually

What do all cells have in common?
small size

What do electric motors use to change electrical energy into kinetic?
electromagnets

What are prokaryotic cells filled with?
cytoplasm

What is the name of plant-like protists?
algae

A sticky, moist secretion that covers mucous membranes is called what?
mucus

What system lets flatworms maintain a proper balance of water and salts?
excretory

What gas associated with global warming is released when limestone is heated during the production of cement?
carbon dioxide

Because their embryos are surrounded by a thin membrane, reptiles are considered what?
amniotes

What type of energy is clean and does not release greenhouse gases?
geothermal energy

Physical and chemical properties of geometric isomers are generally what?
different

What type of cell has a singular chromosome, no nucleus, and few other organelles?
prokaryotic

Protists, fungi, animals, and plants all consist of what kind of cells?
eukaryotic

What does magma that cools underground form?
intrusions

What is used to report the results of scientific measurements?
si units

What is the first digestive organ that food enters?
mouth

Insulin is made up of how many polypeptide chains?
two

What is the term for the energy of movement?
mechanical energy

What type of organisms are helpless at birth and require lots of help from their parents?
altricial organisms

Metallic bonds allow metals to do what, in the manner of a willow tree?
bend without breaking

What is a substance that can not be broken down any further into other substances?
pure substance

What three characteristics do waves have?
reflection, refraction and deflection

What organ creates bile?
liver

What is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter, consisting of a nucleus surrounded by electrons?
atom

Mutation of beneficial proto-oncogenes is a prime culprit in what disease?
cancer

What happens to charges whenever they are accelerated?
they radiate

What is it in bone marrow transplants that may cause a graft versus host reaction?
lymphocytes

The vagina starts at the vulva and ends where?
the uterus

Regulatory proteins bind to regulatory elements to control what?
transcription

Microfilaments are mostly concentrated just beneath what?
the cell membrane

What term is used for any combination of two or more atoms?
molecule

What is biomass made into fuel called?
bio fuel

What type of thin lava forms shapes and tubes as it flows?
pāhoehoe

The nucleolus, which makes ribosomes, is located within what cell structure?
nucleus

Electrons flow through the electrolyte from the ________ to __________ electrode.
negative; positive

What is the name of the part that connects the vagina with the uterus?
cervix

No-till farming is one effort to combat what, caused by typical farming practices?
soil erosion

Geysers are created when what is heated beneath the earth's surface?
water

Increasing voltage with a higher-volt battery does what to the current?
increases it

Hydrogen peroxide will decompose over time to produce _______ gas.
water and oxygen

What kind of pipettes are suitable for measuring very small amounts of liquids?
micropipettes

What is the measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object called?
weight

Boiling points increase with which kind of mass?
molar mass

The largest absorption of heat comes during the vaporization of what?
liquid water

What do fungi absorb to get their nutrition?
organic compounds from other organisms

The variable is the speed of light. for the relationship to hold mathematically, if the speed of light is used in m/s, the wavelength must be in meters and the frequency in what?
hertz

A yolk sac replaces what structure for nourishing a marsupial embryo?
placenta

What is the pressure of gas in a gas mixture termed?
partial pressure

Making ups about 50 percent of the modern american diet, what food group can be classified according to the number of monomers they contain of simple sugars and/or complex sugars?
carbohydrates

What is the process of the fusion of a sperm and an egg called?
fertilization

What is the motion that moves the forearm from the supinated position to the pronated position?
pronation

What organ system consists of the skin, nails and hair?
integumentary system

What does it mean to be a diploid organism?
organism has two copies of each gene

What do you call the carbohydrate formed when two monosaccharides bond together?
disaccharide

What is the term for a resource that is used in a way that meets the needs of the present without keeping future generations from meeting their needs?
sustainable

The genes that code for the positive cell cycle regulators are called what?
proto-oncogenes

What are essential for pollination, but  can spread disease and destroy crops?
insects

Branching food chains and complex trophic interactions form what?
food webs

The chemical behavior of elements can largely be explained by what?
electron configurations

Metalloids, metals, and nonmetals are all classes of what?
elements

How does air always flow?
high to low

What type of invisible waves are used in microwaves?
radiation

Which muscular organ pumps blood all around your body?
heart

What causes the changes of puberty?
estrogen

If a sedimentary rock layer is not horizontal, what is it?
deformed

What system, which includes the skin, plays important roles in protection, sensing stimuli and thermoregulation?
integumentary system

What type of plant tissue transports water and dissolved mineral upward to the leaves?
xylem

What can lenses be used to make?
visual representations

Surface tension is a property of matter that is in what state?
liquid

Amphibians have permeable skin which allows for the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide, what is this "breathing called?"
cutaneous respiration

What is the main component of paper, cardboard, and textiles made from cotton, linen, and other plant fibers?
cellulose

What theory explains the physical behavior of gases?
kinetic theory of gases

Only finished mrnas are exported from the nucleus to what?
cytoplasm

What is the largest artery in the body called?
aorta

What type of change has occurred when a copper penny changes color?
chemical change

A switch in a circuit controls the flow of what, specifically, within the circuit?
current

What causes fertilization to occur?
sperm and an egg fuse

Because they spread seeds, fruits are an agent of what?
dispersal

Proto-oncogenes normally help regulate what?
cell division

The "double helix" shape is associated with what substance found in cells?
dna

What do you call the physical environment in which a species lives and to which it is adapted?
habitat

What is the outer core made of?
liquid metal

What type of eukaryotes are protists normally?
unicellular

An inclined plane is a good example of what kind of machine?
simple

The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with an open-end what?
manometer

Bog destruction in scotland is an example of the widespread loss of what kind of habitat?
wetland

What part of the plant has a root end and a shoot end?
axis

Hardness, density, color, and melting and boiling points are all considered what types of properties?
physical

Low levels of thyroid hormones in the blood cause the release of what by the hypothalamus and pituitary gland?
hormones

The energy changes in what reactions are enormous compared with those of even the most energetic chemical reactions, and they result in a measurable change of mass?
nuclear reactions

What type of chemistry is the study of the composition of matter?
analytical

Scientists did not actually see viruses until what was invented?
electron microscope

Regularly done aerobic activities can help build up endurance and make what vital organ stronger?
heart

What do all chemical sections need to get started?
energy

What do people apply to their lawns that causes water pollution?
chemicals

What do vertebrates possess that is made up of repeating bony units?
vertebral column

How long does it take for earth to rotate on it's axis one time?
24 hours

In what system can energy change forms but the total amount of energy stay constant?
closed

What characteristics of an organism help it survive?
adaptations

The major component of a solution is called what?
solvent

What type of pollution is generated by power plants and factories that can directly raise the temperature of water?
thermal pollution

Nearly all of what are constructed from a set of just 20 common amino acids?
biological proteins

What takes place when water on earth’s surface changes to water vapor?
evaporation

The muscles of the anterior neck assist in deglutition also known as what?
swallowing

Cells infected with viruses secrete what example of early induced proteins, which travel to adjacent cells and induce them to make antiviral proteins, a sacrifice that protects the surrounding cells?
interferons

What term is used to describe changes to an organism’s dna and are an important driver of diversity in populations?
mutations

Molecules with a carboxyl group are called what?
carboxylic acids

What type of galaxies have a rotating disk of stars and dust, a bulge in the middle, and several arms?
spiral galaxies

How is carbon dioxide and water vapor that is produced by cellular respiration released?
exhalation

What occurs when there are differences in fitness among a population?
natural selection

A group of living things and their environment is called what?
ecosystem

Iridescent green beetles, known as jewel beetles, change color because of the light-reflecting properties of the cells that make up this?
their external skeleton

The effects of which kind of selection are larger than the effects of direct natural selection on individuals?
kin selection

Superconductors are materials with a resistivity of?
zero

What affects how high a cake rises when it bakes?
air pressure

Binary fission is an example of which type of production?
asexual

What type of field does earth have?
magnetic

Single bonds allow the atoms they join to rotate freely about the what?
bond axis

Preserved remains or traces of organisms that lived in the past are known as what?
fossils

Co 2 , h 2 o, methane, o 3 , nitrous oxides (no and no 2 ), and chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs) are known as what type of gases?
greenhouse gases

A black solid by itself, this element is incredibly important because of what it makes when it combines with many other elements, including oxygen?
carbon

Radar maps of venus show that it has mountains, canyons and volcanoes surrounded by plains of what?
lava

Bones are part of which body system?
skeletal system

Name the 2 types of carbohydrates?
simple and complex

The lungs are a series of ever-narrowing tubes that end in a myriad of tiny sacs called what?
alveoli

Fish and other aquatic organisms use gills to capture dissolved what?
oxygen

What phase of a human life does not have a definite starting point?
adulthood

Where do all plants come from?
terrestrial ancestors

The esophagus runs a mainly straight route through the mediastinum of what?
thorax

What chambers are responsible for pumping blood out of the heart?
ventricles

What's the term for the period during which women's ovaries stop producing eggs?
menopause

What is the set of steps that scientists use to learn about the world?
scientific method

Which are the closest living relations to land plants?
charophytes

In vertebrates, what structure runs from the brain to the tail end of the backbone?
spinal cord

What is it called when the chance that a certain event will occur?
probability

What is the hardest of all minerals?
diamonds

When bread bakes, yeast releases which gas?
carbon dioxide

What nervous tissue cells play a supporting role to neurons?
glial cells

Use of oil-consuming bacteria to clean up an oil spill is an example of what?
bioremediation

What is the process called in which living things produce offspring?
reproduction

What are the building blocks of peptides?
amino acids

The pull of the moon’s gravity on earth is the main cause of what water phenomenon?
tides

What happens to evolution when equilibrium is reached within the genes of the population?
it stops occurring

Prostaglandins worsen what by increasing nociceptor sensitivity to noxious stimuli?
pain

The outer surface of the heart changes from positive to negative during what?
depolarization

What are the closest relatives to modern angiosperms?
gnetophytes

Heating a gas gives its particles more of what type of energy?
kinetic energy

What is the term for long carbohydrate molecules of repeated monomer units joined together by glycosidic bonds?
polysaccharides

What is the only known planet with large amounts of water?
earth

What is the disease in which bones lose mass and become more fragile and likely to break?
osteoporosis

What speeds up the reactions of chemical digestion?
digestive enzymes

In how many states does water exist on earth?
three matter states

Find the overall magnification of what instrument by finding the magnification of the objective, then the magnification of the eyepiece?
compound microscope

Insects have a highly specialized type of respiratory system called what?
tracheal system

What are the two main minerals found in ocean water?
sodium, chloride

Which form of digestion is a purely physical process that does not change the chemical nature of the food?
mechanical

What was the early study of chemistry called?
alchemy

What are used to balance chemical equations?
coefficients

What kind of core does mercury have?
liquid metal

Physical features on the earth's surface are known as ______
landforms

"direct" and "alternating" are two kinds of what, which is associated with electricity?
current

What is a strombolian eruption named for?
mt. stromboli

Which part of the plant conduct water and minerals as well as anchor the plant.
roots

Ice caps are found only in greenland and which other place?
antarctica

During a what type of reaction do chemical changes take place?
chemical

In mammals, the cells on the exterior form the trophectoderm, which goes on to form what?
extraembryonic tissues

In sexual reproduction, what is the name of the gamete cell the male must contribute?
sperm

The term "environment of deposition" is useful for understanding the characteristics of what type of rock?
sedimentary

Apical dominance, seed germination, gravitropism, and resistance to freezing are all positively influenced by what type of chemicals in plants?
hormones

In the nasal cavity, what 2 things trap particles from incoming air?
mucus and hair

Elemental carbon is a black, dull-looking solid that conducts heat and this?
electricity

Who created the periodic table?
dmitri mendeleev

What are unique in having adaptive immunity in addition to innate immunity?
vertebrates

All three axes are established before the zygote begins to undergo what?
cleavage

Because they are charged (polar), these ions do not diffuse through what?
membrane

What are complex organic molecules that make up cells?
proteins

A light bulb converts electrical energy to light and what?
thermal energy

What are chemical bonds between atoms of nonmetals that share valence electrons called?
covalent bonds

What piece of technology can you use to see infrared light?
night goggles

Lenses make use of what to create images?
refraction of light

What do animals observe in others to help solve problems?
behavior

Reef sponges typically have what type of beneficial relationships with other reef species?
symbiotic

Where is the only place an electric charge can be found?
conductor

What part of a cell do proteins travel to to be modified for the specific job they will do?
golgi apparatus

When current flows in just one direction, what is it called?
direct current

An ammeter must be connected in series with what to allow it to accurately measure the current flow without causing any disruptions?
resistors

What combines with rain to form acid rain?
nitrogen and sulfur oxides

Bacterial stis include chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis are diseases that can usually be cured with what?
antibiotics

Rubbing your hands together warms them by converting work into what energy?
thermal energy

What is the opposite of nuclear fusion?
nuclear fission

What are the three classifications of elements?
metals, non-metals and metaloids

Worms use a hydrostatic type of what anatomical structure to move through their environment?
skeleton

What flexible organ enables swallowing and speech?
tongue

What is a wall of rocks or concrete called?
groin

What are the special mating behaviors in birds called?
courtship

What kind of charges do protons give the nucleus?
positive

What happens when a cell takes in substances through its membrane?
endocytosis

What are compounds formed by ionic bonds called?
ionic compounds (salts)

What kind of diagrams can be used to illustrate electron movements and ion formation?
electron dot diagrams

What always continues in a red supergiant?
fusion

Glycolysis, the krebs cycle, and the electron transport chain are stages in what process?
aerobic cellular respiration

Sex-linked traits are located on genes on what chromosomes?
sex

What nerves attached to the brain are mainly responsible for motor and sensory functions?
cranial nerves

What would you need to see most cells?
microscope

The intermolecular structure of what has spaces that are not present in liquid water?
ice

Some compounds form rigid frameworks called what?
crystals

What type of relationship is it when one variable increases the other variable decreases?
inverse

What is the term for polyatomic ligands with two or more donor atoms?
chelates

A single, often oversimplified, path through which energy and matter flow through an ecosystem is also known as what?
food chain

Oncogenes are involved in the formation of what disease?
cancer

The lack of annihilation radiation coming to us from space proves that the universe is dominated by what?
matter

Dinitrophenol (dnp) is an uncoupler that makes the inner mitochondrial membrane leaky to protons. it was used until 1938 as a what?
weight loss drug

Melanocytes are located in which layer of the epidermis?
bottom

Soils with higher capacities generally have a larger reserve of what?
mineral nutrients

Materials that are good conductors of thermal energy are called?
thermal conductors

Composite cones are steep-sided, cone-shaped types of what, which produce explosive eruptions?
volcanoes

Deficiency of what is symptomized by nausea, fatigue and dizziness, and can be triggered by excessive sweating?
electrolytes

Most thoracic vertebrae have two facets that articulate with the head of what structure?
rib

Thrombocytes are more commonly known by what name?
platelets

What is the term for the remains or traces of living organisms?
fossils

What type of disease is caused by pathogens?
infectious diseases

Worms grow to adult size without going through what stage?
larval

What serves as a first responder to pathogenic threats that bypass natural physical and chemical barriers of the body?
innate immune system

Of the three basic types of emissions, which has the highest penetrating power?
gamma radiation

True animals are divided into those with radial versus bilateral styles of what?
symmetry

While still an early fetus, what is the skeleton made of?
cartilage

What forms the pathway of water and nutrients from roots to leaves and flower?
the stem

What proteins span the entire plasma membrane?
transmembrane

Why is blue cheese blue?
fungus

What type of joint are ball-and-socket, hinge, and pivot examples of?
movable

Are valence electrons attracted more or less strongly when they are farther from the nucleus?
less strongly

What do we call the predictable distribution of molecular speeds found in gas of many molecules?
maxwell-boltzmann distribution

Name the simple sugar that is a component of starch.
glucose

What do vertebrates have which invertebrates do not?
backbones

Occuring throughout the lifespan of the organism, what stages proceed in a certain order?
life cycle stages

The fetus is connected to what by a tube called the umbilical cord?
placenta

What are most fresh fruits, vegetables, whole grains rich in?
cellulose

What term tells you how quickly the angle changes and can occur in either clockwise or counterclockwise directions?
angular velocity

What term is used to describe how fast a chemical reaction occurs?
reaction rate

What is the term for protists that produce spores, such as the toxoplasm?
sporozoans

Why does neptune's appearance change?
turbulent atmosphere

Changing levels of what substances partly explain emotional ups and downs in teens?
hormones

What term refers to larger evolutionary changes that result in new species?
macroevolution

What do you call a lens that causes the light rays to bend away from its axis?
diverging lens

Diffusion can occur across a semipermeable membrane, such as the cell membrane, as long as a what exists?
concentration gradient

Scientists use what scale to illustrate the order in which events on earth have happened?
geologic time scale

What will happen if the gas particles inside an inflated balloon suddenly stop moving?
balloon deflates

What are the major sites of gibberellin production?
young roots and leaves

What is required for interconversion between the two forms of an isomeric pair?
breaking and reforming

Bacteria reproduce through what process, where the chromosome copies itself, forming two genetically identical copies?
binary fission

Water molecules are polar, so they form what type of bonds?
hydrogen

The cecum is the first part of what structure, where wastes in a liquid state enter from the small intestine?
large intestine

What are the "levels" in a food chain or web called?
trophic

Are bones considered living or dead tissues?
living

What forms when water in the atmosphere condenses on dust particles suspended in the air?
clouds

What are the two types of fermentation?
lactic acid and alcoholic

Aging occurs as cells lose their ability to do what?
divide

What is it called when liquid water falls from the sky?
precipitation

Applying a pressure greater than the osmotic pressure of a solution will do what?
reverse osmosis

The molecule pictured above is thyroxine, a compound produced by which gland?
thyroid

Birds generally practice what kind of relationship, with both parents helping to care for the young?
monogamous

Gravitropism ensures that roots grow into the soil and that shoots grow toward what?
sunlight

What is the mass of one mole of any given substance?
molar mass

The corona surrounds which major object in our solar system?
the sun

Respiration that occurs in the cells is called?
cellular respiration

Metabolism is an emergent property of life that arises from orderly interactions between what?
molecules

During cellular respiration, carbons from the glucose molecule are changed back into what gas?
carbon dioxide

How does the distance between galaxies change as the universe expands?
it increases

Rainwater absorbs carbon dioxide (co 2 ) as it falls. the co 2 combines with water to form what?
carbonic acid

Most molecular compounds that have a mass similar to water are in what state of matter at room temperature?
gas

What do you call the movement of molecules across a membrane without the input of energy?
passive transport

Opposite charges attract and like charges do what?
repulse

What molecules are usually insoluble in water?
non-polar

What occurs when there is a sudden discharge of static electricity between a cloud and the ground?
lightning

If citrate accumulates in mitochondria, some of it passes into where and inhibits phosphofructokinase?
cytosol

For most of a star’s life, hydrogen atoms fuse to form what?
helium atoms

What two ways do channels respond during membrane depolarization?
independently and sequentially

What kind of compound, contained in coffee and alcohol, increases urine volume?
diuretic

In mammals what does the zona pellucida protect?
egg

What type of vertebrates control body temperature to just a limited extent from the outside by changing behavior?
ectothermic

Worldwide, viruses seem to play a role in what percentage of the cases of human cancer?
15%

Elements are pure substances that make up what?
all matter

What reproductive part is stored in a plant's pollen?
the sperm

Atoms of what element ultimately form in a red supergiant?
iron

What are the two types of fats?
saturated and unsaturated

What structure consists of an outer layer of cells called the trophoblast and an inner cell mass called the embryoblast?
blastocyst

Metabolic pathways are a series of reactions catalyzed by multiple what?
enzymes

What causes eutrophication to occur?
excess of fertilizers and other nutrients

What do you call the separation of ions that occurs when a solid ionic compound dissolves?
dissociation

What is light with wavelengths shorter than visible light called?
ultraviolet light

How much distance can beta particles travel through air?
meter

What is created when the warm air at the cold front rises and creates a low pressure cell, causing winds to rush into the low pressure?
rising air column

People with osteoporosis have an increase risk of what?
bone fractures

What is the main artery of the systematic circulation called?
aorta

The length that an object has travelled in one or multiple directions can also be called what?
distance

In animals, what process occurs only in germ cells, which are in the ovaries or testes?
meiosis

Which theory describes the benzene molecule and other planar aromatic hydrocarbon molecules as hexagonal rings of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms with the unhybridized p orbital of each carbon atom perpendicular to the plane of the ring?
valence bond theory

What type of carbon dioxide levels have been rising for the past several decades?
atmospheric

Freezing rain that falls from the sky is also called?
sleet

Do waves move faster when particles are close to each other or far away?
close

Adult bees include workers, a queen and what other type?
drones

Name the law that determines as to which rock layers are younger or older than others.
law of superposition

Since the electric field lines point radially away from the charge, they are perpendicular to what?
equipotential lines

What are in leaves that function as solar collectors and food factories?
chloroplasts

What is the process of producing eggs in the ovary is called?
oogenesis

What term refers to the deliberate prevention of pregnancy?
contraception

Homologous chromosomes move toward what poles?
opposite

Why are the stems of many xerophytes fleshy?
stores water

Most body fluids that you release from your body contain chemicals that kill pathogens. for example, mucus, sweat, tears, and saliva contain enzymes called?
lysozymes

What is at the top of the mesosphere?
mesopause

Yogurt is made from milk fermented with what type of organism?
bacteria

What happens to an animal's telomeres as it ages?
shorten

Characterized by uncontrolled growth, cancerous cells are also called what?
malignant

Historically, malaria has rivaled what as the leading cause of human death by infectious disease?
tuberculosis

When the number of electrons and the number of protons are equal, the object is what?
neutral

The angle of refraction depends on the index of what?
refraction

Systems are in thermal equilibrium when they have the same of what measurement?
temperature

What needs to be increased to change a solid into a liquid or gas?
temperature

Minerals that are not compounds consist of a single what?
element

What globular protein is used in the construction of the hollow tube?
tubulin

Two important types of energy that can be converted to one another include potential and what?
kinetic

What is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable membrane according to the concentration gradient of water across the membrane
osmosis

What are the key cells of an immune response?
lymphocytes

Darwin found that, since all species are related to each other and some of them evolve together, so they develop similar what?
adaptations

Newly formed what aggregates into threads that form the framework of the clot?
fibrin

The general term peptide refers to an amino acid chain of what?
unspecified length

Average global temperature has been doing what for the past several decades?
rising

What disease is caused when the oomycete plasmopara viticola parasitizes grape plants?
downy mildew

What is the diploid number for fruit flies?
8

An example of irreversible denaturation of what substance occurs to the liquid albumin when an egg is fried?
protein

In an environment, symbiosis, competition, and relying on other organisms for food are examples of what?
interaction

What is another term for ghost sharks?
chimaera

What makes the realized niche of chthamalus much smaller than its fundamental niche?
interspecific competition

Red stars are the coolest; which are the hottest?
blue

Which type of muscle is most common in the human body?
skeletal

What is the name for a combination of elements that acts as a different substance?
compound

Volcanoes can be active, dormant, or what else?
extinct

Vesicular transport includes exocytosis and what?
endocytosis

What supports the scapula, transmits the weight and forces from the upper limb to the body trunk, and protects the underlying nerves and blood vessels?
clavicle

What are the three fundamental phases of matter?
solid, liquid, and gas

What system in the human body makes white blood cells that protect the body from diseases?
lymphatic system

Which process or force pulls rocks apart?
tension stress

What rigid layer surrounds the cell membrane of a plant cell?
cell wall

When does internal reflection occur?
when light goes from a slow medium to a fast

What is the fourth planet from the sun?
mars

Which region of dna consists of one or more genes that encode the proteins needed for a specific function?
operon

Members of the genus trypanosoma are flagellate protozoa that cause what?
sleeping sickness

The major salivary enzyme is called?
amylase

Who first discovered the moons of jupiter in 1610?
galileo

Fossil records show that what process may occur in "fits and starts"?
evolution

What part of the ear is often described as a bony labyrinth?
inner ear

Enzymes speed up the rate of a specific chemical reaction and is therefore known as what?
biochemical catalysts

What is required to break bonds in reactants?
energy

Organs are made up of two or more types of what?
tissues

During what type of reproduction do two haploid gametes join in the process of fertilization to produce a diploid zygote?
sexual reproduction

What does the ground tissue consist mostly of in the stems of both monocots and eudicots?
parenchyma cells

What type of wave is visible light?
electromagnetic

What catalyzes the hydrolysis of amino acids from the n-terminal end of a protein?
aminopeptidase

Which group of species is defined as having moist skin without scales?
amphibians

Where are integral proteins embedded?
libid bilayer

Skeletal muscles are attached to bones by what?
tendons

The duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum are the main regions of which organ?
small intestine

Temperature and pressure affect changes in phases or states of what?
matter

The water in some springs are hot because they're heated by what?
hot magma

What consists of all the living things and nonliving things interacting in the same area?
ecosystem

How much can the bacteria in your gut weigh?
2 pounds

As a myotube is formed from many different myoblast cells, it contains many nuclei, but has a continuous what?
cytoplasm

When thinking of the rate at which two gases mix, it is inverse proportional to the density of what?
gas

What serious sti can damage the heart, brain and other organs or even cause death, if untreated?
syphilis

When a seed is produced by apomixis, the embryo develops without what?
fertilization

When an oxidation number of an atom is decreased in the course of a redox reaction, that atom is being what?
reduced

A venule is an extremely small vein, generally 8–100 micrometers in diameter. postcapillary venules join multiple capillaries exiting from a capillary bed. multiple venules join to form what?
veins

The active site can only bind certain what?
substrates

In a food chain, what group of organisms breaks down animal remains and wastes to get energy?
decomposers

What is the term for organisms that have adaptations to both salty and basic conditions?
haloalkaliphiles

What organism is the most disruptive towards the diversity of other species?
humans

Migration and hibernation are examples of behaviors that occur on what temporal basis?
annual

What are all of the living or once-living aspects of the environment called?
biotic factors

Temporal and spatial summation at the axon hillock determines whether a neuron generates what?
action potential

What two systems are the lungs part of?
respiratory and excretory

What occurs in a formerly inhabited area that was disturbed?
secondary succession

What can demonstrate the decrease in energy, biomass or numbers within an ecosystem?
ecological pyramids

What evolutionary concept characterizes a species by body shape and other structural features?
morphological species concept

What determines the unique sequence for every protein?
gene encoding

By breaking down organic matter, roundworms play an important role in which cycle?
carbon cycle

In the lungs, oxygen diffuses out of the alveoli and into where?
capillaries

What term is used to describe animals that excrete ammonia?
ammonotelic

The numbers and types of species in most ecosystems change to some degree through time and this is called?
ecological succession

The enormous number of species is due to the tremendous variety of what?
environments

What is the energy needed to start a reaction between catalysts and reactants called?
activation energy

Which proteins bind to the surfaces of microorganisms and are particularly attracted to pathogens that are already tagged by the adaptive immune system?
complement proteins

What type of competition occurs between members of the same species?
intraspecific

Alternation of generations is characteristic of the life cycle of all what?
plants

What carries the instructions from the nucleus to the cytoplasm?
messenger rna

What is measured using units pascal, bar, atmosphere or mmhg?
pressure

What is a disease that can be spread from animals to humans called?
zoonosis

Where does most of the mass for an atom reside?
nucleus

When electric current flows through a wire, it creates what type of field that surrounds the wire in circles?
magnetic

What is the outermost layer of the skin?
epidermis

What is it called when waves spread out as they travel around obstacles or through openings in obstacles?
diffraction

What is the process of oxidized iron that has been exposed to air and water?
rust

What consists of one or two closed loops through which current can flow?
electric circuit

What muscle is imperative to breathing in helping the air move in and out of the lungs?
diaphragm

What third property is different if two boxes have the same volume but one has greater mass?
density

What occurs when two opposite charges are separated by some amount of distance?
dipole

What is the term for the span in the life of an organism from one generation to the next?
life cycle

Deposition also occurs when a stream or river empties into a large body of what?
still water

What is the process called in which nutrients pass into the bloodstream?
absorption

The colloquial term "ribbon worm" refers to the mostly marine species of what phylum?
nemertea

The number, size, shape, and banding pattern of chromosomes make them easily identifiable in a karyogram and allow for the assessment of many chromosomal
abnormalities

The logistics of carrying out cellular metabolism sets limits on what physical property of the cell?
size

What large dwarf planet in our solar system was only discovered in 2005?
eris

Covalent bond energies can be used to estimate the enthalpy changes of what?
chemical reactions

What type of waste is eliminated from the body through the anus?
solid

Fungi cause three different types of human illness: poisonings, parasitic infections, and what?
allergies

If you find dna floating in a cell's cytoplasm, what kind of organism is it?
prokaryotic

Graded potentials are temporary changes in what, the characteristics of which depend on the size of the stimuli?
membrane voltage

How many different types of taste neurons does the tongue contain?
five

Deer ticks are vectors for the bacteria that cause what disease?
lyme

What is established by the ph differences between the two sides of the blastoderm cells?
dorsal-ventral axis

During metamorphosis, most salamander species go through what aquatic stage on the way to becoming adults?
larval stage

What is a purification process where the components of a liquid mixture are vaporized and then condensed and isolated?
distillation

What gas comprises about three-fourths of earth's atmosphere?
nitrogen

The lymphatic system helps return fluid that leaks from the blood vessels back to what system?
cardiovascular

Light is energy that travels in the form of what type of wave?
electromagnetic

Naphthalens is a chemical which is commonly used in what?
mothballs

What substances are secreted by specialized cells usually located in endocrine glands?
hormones

Chlorine and bromine gases released into the atmosphere have helped damage what layer of the atmosphere?
ozone layer

Which kind of vertebrates are amphibians?
ectothermic vertebrates

What type of forces are involved when deposited rock forms deltas or barrier islands?
constructive forces

Vertebrates differ from invertebrates because they lack this?
backbone or a spinal column

The fluid surrounding cells is hemolymph in insects and other animals with an open type of what system?
circulatory

Whan an alkene is aquired by an alkyl halide in an organic reaction, what kind of reaction is this?
elimination

What is the process by which undigested food leaves the body?
egestion

Because of its composition, oil does not do what in water?
dissolve

Linked genes are located on the same what?
chromosome

What move the body by contracting against the skeleton?
muscles

In what energy industry process are fluids pumped through a borehole, creating fractures in the rock that contains the natural gas?
fracking

What counter provides a sensitive means of detecting radioactivity?
geiger

What do stored fats provide our body with for later use?
energy

What long molecules are composed of chains of units called monomers?
polymers

Where does an object gain or lose it's energy to during travel through a potential difference?
electric field

Where do biochemical reactions take place?
inside the organisms' cells

When fuel is burned, most of the energy is released in what form?
heat

How are voltmeters placed in the circuit?
in parallel

What is an attitude of doubt about the truthfulness of claims that lack empirical evidence?
skepticism

Cardiovascular disease, some types of cancer, type 2 diabetes, and obesity are considered what kind of preventable diseases?
lifestyle diseases

What process is the primary function of the branching internal tubules called protonephridia?
osmoregulation

Which law means that the simplest of competing theories is most likely to be correct?
law of parsimony

Iron will do what when it is exposed to oxygen and water?
rust

About how many days does it take the moon to make one orbit around the earth?
28

The most common two-lens telescope, like the simple microscope, uses lenses of what shape?
convex

Glucose, galactose, and fructose are all what?
hexoses

Which property can you study by comparing the mass of an object relative to its size?
density

What term means the percent by mass of each element in a compound?
percent composition

The combined gas law involves three properties of a gas - volume, absolute temperature, and what?
pressure

What is the force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions?
ionic bond

In the lungs, bicarbonate is transported back into the red blood cells in exchange for what?
chloride

What is defined as an organism in the earliest stages of development?
an embryo

Microevolution occuring and taking place over many generations results in?
macroevolution

What do craters and rifts become when they fill with water?
lakes

What system carries messages from sense organs and internal organs to the central nervous system?
peripheral nervous system

What disease is described as a respiratory disorder characterized by wheezing, coughing, and a feeling of constriction in the chest?
asthma

What is used to darken images of the sky?
polarizing filters

A tumor of what gland can cause hypersecretion of growth hormone?
pituitary gland

After the blood in the pulmonary capillaries becomes saturated with oxygen, it leaves the lungs and travels where?
to the heart

Depending on the surrounding conditions, normal matter usually exists as one of three phases: solid, liquid, or this?
gas

What celestial bodies are classified by color and temperature, ranging from blue to red and hottest to coolest?
stars

What carries small pollen grains farther than they otherwise would go?
wind

What do rocket-based systems use to propel itself into space?
chemical reactions

What term simply means sensitive beyond normal levels of activation?
hypersensitivity

The hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting hormones are secreted near capillaries at the base of the what?
hypothalamus

A microscope can be made from two of what kind of lenses?
convex

What produces almost one-half of the earth's oxygen through photosynthesis?
protists

What is said to occur when both traits appear in a heterozygous offspring?
codominance

What type of response do signal transductions within target cells bring about?
physiological

What happens to meteors as they fall through the mesosphere?
they burn

What are the three main types of rocks?
sedimentary, igneous and metamorphic

What is the only continent without amphibians?
antarctica

A hair grows out of a follicle and passes through what before extending above the skin surface?
epidermis

What are the long, thin structures that protrude from the cell membrane and help single-celled organisms move or swim towards food?
flagella

What is the unit of evolution?
the population

What occurs where the water motion slows?
deposition

The force on a charged particle in a magnetic field is always perpendicular to both its velocity vector and the?
field vector

What is the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body called?
excretion

What is the skeleton of the cell?
cytoskeleton

A salt concentration of 32 percent is nearly ten times that of what abundant resource?
seawater

Atoms of one element can be transformed into another through which process?
nuclear reactions

Blood from the body enters what chamber of the heart before it is pumped to the right ventricle and then to the lungs?
right atrium

Dna replication, chromosome segregation, and the separation into two daughter cells are steps in what process?
binary fission

In science, what is defined as the transfer of energy from a vibrating object in waves that travel through matter?
sound

Where in the cell does transcription occur?
nucleus

Hydrogen peroxide is commonly sold as a 3% by volume solution for use as a what?
disinfectant

In plants, pigment molecules absorb only visible light for photosynthesis. the visible light seen by humans as white light actually exists in a what?
rainbow of colors

When an acid and base solutions react, they produce water and a neutral ionic compound known as what?
salt

In the body, oxygen is used by cells of the body’s tissues and carbon dioxide is produced as what?
waste product

Chemical digestion in the small intestine cannot occur without the help of the pancreas and what bile-producing organ?
liver

What property are alkali metals at room temperature?
solid

What is the name of the smallest planet in our solar system, which is also nearest to the sun?
mercury

All gymnosperm species and many eudicot species undergo what?
secondary growth

Slow-twitch or fast-twitch and oxidative or glycolytic describe what type of fibers?
skeletal muscle fibers

Plants have a touch response known as what?
thigmotropism

What is at the center of our solar system?
the sun

The different types of what systems work together to carry out all the life functions of the individual?
organ systems

Why is uranus so faint?
far away

Which systems work together to provide cells with the oxygen they need for cellular respiration?
respiratory and circulatory systems

What organs have tiny tubes leading to and from elastic air sacs that improve airflow and oxygen uptake?
lungs

What is produced when sulfur and oxygen combine?
sulfur oxide

A skeleton that consists of hard, mineralized structures located within the soft tissue of organisms is called what?
endoskeleton

What evolutionary process does not favor altruistic behavior that causes the death of the altruist?
natural selection

In seed plants, after fertilization, what will the ovule eventually develop into?
seed

What is the message sent from the nucleus to the ribosome?
mrna

The phagocytes that are part of the body’s second line of defense attack any of what that they encounter?
pathogens

Fungi are no longer classified as what, possessing cell walls made of chitin rather than cellulose?
plants

What kind of compounds are named for their positive metal ion first, followed by their negative nonmetal ion?
ionic compounds

Endoscopes are used to explore the body through various orifices or these?
minor incisions

Bread has little holes in it from carbon dioxide produced by what?
yeast

What unit are atomic radii typically measured in?
picometers

What are fungus like protists?
slime molds and water molds

Alpha, beta, and gamma emissions are associated with what kind of energy?
radiation

Transport of nutrients and regulation of body temperature through fluid flow are characteristics of which bodily system?
cardiovascular

What are the two components of a mixture called?
solute and a solvent

Insulin is produced by what cells of the pancreas?
beta

What is the arch called that forms when plasma of the sun flows along the loop that connects sunspots?
solar prominence

What does some amphibians have as juveniles but not as adults living on land?
lateral line system

Ejaculation occurs when muscle contractions propel sperm from where?
epididymes

Adult sea stars have what kind of symmetry?
radial symmetry

The four types of light receptors include different types of cones and what else?
rods

In what do substances combine chemically to form a new substance?
compound

What is the colorless gas with a sharp, pungent odor used in smelling salts?
ammonia

Groupings of related organs in the human body are referred to as "organ" what?
systems

The enzymes that participate in fatty acid catabolism are located in what?
mitochondria

Which organ of the body do large tapeworms attack or block?
intestines

The sternum and 12 pairs of ribs with their costal cartilages make up what?
thoracic cage

Which lipid is mainly responsible for narrowing arteries and causing the disease atherosclerosis?
cholesterol

Physical or chemical changes are generally accompanied by a transfer of what?
energy

What is the term for a dynamic equilibrium that is maintained in body tissues and organs?
homeostasis

What has a pseudocoelom and hydrostatic skeleton?
roundworms

In what two ways are volcanic eruptions characterized?
explosive and non-explosive

Each enhancer is made up of short dna sequences called what?
distal control elements

For a star to form, what force pulls gas and dust into the center of the nebula?
gravity

What do you call elements that contain only atoms of one type of element?
native elements

The organ systems of the body work together to carry out life processes and maintain what?
homeostasis

This process of combining the wave functions for atomic orbitals is called what?
hybridization

Carbon is a nonmetal with a significantly higher electronegativity; it is therefore more likely to accept electrons in what kind of reaction?
redox reaction

What is denoted by the number above the chemical symbol of each element in a modern periodic table?
atomic number

What does the tires meeting the road cause when a car accelerates?
friction

What gas is contributing to the greenhouse effect?
carbon dioxide

A complex interactions of hormones result in an edible fruit that entices animals that help disperse what?
seeds

What are the cells caused that parasites spread through their host?
sporozoites

When can mutations occur in genes?
during dna replication

The sites of protein synthesis are tiny structures called?
ribosomes

Mollusks, annelids, and arthropods are considered what?
protostomes

One of the simplest machines is the lever, which is a rigid bar pivoted at a fixed place called what?
fulcrum

In essence, a virus is simply a nucleic acid surrounded by what?
a protein coat

How does the number of protons compare to the number of electrons in an electrically neutral atom?
they are equal

The scientific method is a method of research with defined steps that include experiments and careful what?
observation

The protist life cycle benefits by including what forms of reproduction?
asexual and sexual

With what does cytokinins act in concert to stimulate cell division and influence the pathway of differentiation?
auxin

Puberty and other physical changes occurs during which stage of development?
adolescence

What makes organic compounds ubiquitous is the chemistry of their what?
carbon core

What type of drugs can increase water loss by interfering with the recapture of solutes and water from the forming urine?
diuretics

This type of tissue consists of bundles of xylem and phloem and transports fluids throughout the plant.
vascular tissue

What is the scientific name of the thighbone, the longest, heaviest, and strongest bone in the body?
femur

What determines which type of precipitation falls?
air temperature

Algae is a promising alternative to traditional crops for what type of fuels?
biofuel

Cancers derived from epithelial cells are referred to as what?
carcinomas

Vibrating objects such as drumheads produce what?
sound energy

What two element makes up a hyrdocarbon?
carbon and hydrogen

What are monosaccharides and disaccharides also called?
simple sugars

Terrestrial biomes are associated with land, while aquatic ones are associated with what?
water

Different shapes often correlate with different what in cells?
functions

What structure is found at the top of the head of the sperm that helps it penetrate and fertilize the egg?
acrosome

What makes up most of  biological tissues?
water

What occurs when some substances change chemically to other substances?
chemical reaction

What type of butterfly do birds avoid eating since it makes them sick?
monarch butterflies

Birds possess a cloaca, a structure that allows water to be reabsorbed from waste back into this?
blood stream

What contain organelles common to other cells, such as a nucleus and mitochondria, and also have more specialized structures, including dendrites and axons?
neurons

Hurricanes and winter storms both develop from what, which often form when the jet stream dips south in the winter?
cyclones

Which body system controls all the others by sending electrical messages?
the nervous system

What occurs when water on the surface changes to water vapor?
evaporation

What is the position of rock layers and the relative ages called?
superposition

What is the field of biology that focuses on the study of inheritance in humans?
human genetics

The acidity of a solution is typically assessed experimentally by measurement of its what?
ph

Where is chemical energy stored?
atom bonds

What kind of fuels include coal, oil, and natural gas?
fossil

What do you call the slope that forms the edge of the continent?
the continental slope

What do contour lines that are close together indicate?
steep slope

What is the most common type of cancer developed in children?
leukemia

How many chambers are in the heart?
four

The central vacuole maintains turgor pressure against what?
the cell wall

In the small intestine, chyme mixes with bile, which emulsifies what substances?
fats

Which electromagnetic waves are the most energetic of all electromagnetic waves?
gamma rays

Glycolysis harvests chemical energy by oxidizing glucose to what?
pyruvate

What is the term for the most abundant species in a community, characterized by high competitive abilities?
dominant species

Salt-water biomes in the ocean are called what?
marine biomes

What occurs before the endometrium thickens in estrous cycles?
ovulation

Structures like the human tail bone and whale pelvis are called what?
vestigial structures

Hazardous waste is material that is toxic, chemically active, corrosive, or what?
flammable

Which component of the electron transport chain does cyanide inhibit?
cytochrome c oxidase

Diseases of this system include epilepsy, strokes, and alzheimer’s disease
nervous system

About how full is the outer energy level in metalloids?
half full

Which chemical element is the basis of all life on earth?
carbon

What structures of the cardiovascular system help regulate body processes by either constricting or dilating?
blood vessels

What is the term for the class of ectothermic, four-legged vertebrates that produce amniotic eggs?
reptiles

The goal of proteomics is to identify or compare what substances expressed from a given genome under specific conditions, study the interactions between them, and use the information to predict cell behavior or develop drug targets?
proteins

Radiometric dating methods, such as carbon-14 dating depend on what type of decay?
radioactive

What is the brightest star in the orion constellation?
rigel

Which organelle specific to plant cells is responsible for photosynthesis?
the chloroplast

What is another word for thermal energy?
heat

Roots grow in length and width from the primary and secondary what?
meristem

What often form symbiotic associations with much larger organisms?
prokaryotes

Name the fever that is caused by a virus that has antigens similar to molecules in human heart tissues.
rheumatic fever

What is the smallest planet in our solar system?
mercury

What is the term for when a substance boils and changes to gas?
boiling point

Where are hormones released?
bloodstream

The union of gametes is called?
fertilization

What type of behavior occurs naturally in all animals of a given species?
innate

What parts of comets make them easy to see?
comas and tails

What gives the body shape and support?
skeleon

What do you call sound that has a wave frequency higher than the human ear can detect?
ultrasound

Plants not only contribute food but what else for organisms?
oxygen

Substances that act as both weak acids and bases are said to be what?
amphoteric

What is the medical process of removing wastes and excess water from the blood by diffusion and ultrafiltration called?
dialysis

What is the "a" horizon commonly known as?
topsoil

What are the building blocks of life?
cells

The amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of one gram of liquid water by 1°c is also known as?
specific heat

What helps amplify the effects of extracellular signals?
enzymatic cascades

What units are typically used to measure heats of reaction?
kilojoules

What are solutions that maintain a relatively constant ph when an acid or a base is added?
buffer

Along with dna, what is the other main type of nucleic acid?
rna

Glutathione is a low-molecular-weight compound found in living cells that is produced naturally by what?
liver

What work together in pairs to bend or straighten a joint?
muscles

What are the outer-shell electrons of an atom called?
valence electrons

What kind of reproduction is vegetative reproduction?
asexual

What type of tissue runs the length of a stem in vascular bundles?
vascular tissue

Birds have a relatively large heart and a rapid what?
heart rate

When a warm air mass becomes trapped between two cold air masses, what type of front occurs?
occluded front

What is water falling from the sky called?
precipitation

What forms when atoms share or transfer valence electrons?
bonds

Which part of the axon has a higher membrane potential?
axon hillock

A diploid zygote is formed when one sperm does what?
fertilizes the egg

As ph increases what happens to a solution?
becomes more basic

What is the term for changes in speed or direction, changes that make a roller coaster ride so exciting?
acceleration

What do aquatic mollusk species use for respiration?
gills

Because the solute is moving down the concentration gradient, and no input of energy is required, facilitated diffusion is considered what type of transport?
passive

What does fiber help keep at normal levels in the body?
sugar and lipids

What is it called when plant roots absorb liquid water and release water vapor into the atmosphere?
transpiration

Fossil fuels and nuclear power are what type of resource?
nonrenewable

The stoichiometric coefficients indicate the relative amounts of what?
reactants and products

Blood enters the heart in what valve?
atria

What works through chemical reactions that change the rock?
chemical weathering

What is necessary for new alleles to be created?
new mutations

What does the placenta sustain during pregnancy?
the fetus

Other than nitrogen, which nutrient most often limits marine production?
phosphorus

What astronomical phenomenon is often comprised of remnants of the earliest material that formed in the solar system?
meteorites

Minerals are grouped based on what?
chemical composition

What is the term for the average number of individuals in a population for a given area?
population density

What is the shape of the thyroid gland?
butterfly-shaped

Instead of using their nose, reptiles can use what organ to smell scents?
tongue

How does the diaphragm look like when it is at rest?
dome-shaped

What is the smallest unit of matter that still maintains it's properties of being an element?
an atom

Evolution occurs by what process whereby better-adapted members pass along their traits, according to darwin?
natural selection

In flowering plants, male gametophytes are in grains of what?
pollen

How many different ways can molecules pass through a phospholipid membrane?
three

Snow and rain are forms of what weather?
precipitation

There is a positive correlation between the ability to conduct thermal energy and what other energy, as exemplified by metals?
electricity

Most ocean waves are caused by what?
wind

What kind of climates are found at or near the equator?
tropical climates

The uranium series is a chain constituting one what, which encompass naturally occurring isotopes of the heaviest elements?
radioactive decay family

Producing light without a high temperature is called?
luminescence

Mutualism is a symbiotic relationship that has what effect on both species involved?
beneficial

What do you call chemical reactions that take place inside living things?
biochemical reactions

What types of blood cells are required for aerobic respiration?
red blood cells

The phase transition of a substance changing from a liquid state to a gaseous state is an example of what?
entropoy

What is the fracture called when rocks on both sides move?
a fault

In heart muscle, what released by neurons activates a signal transduction pathway?
acetylcholine

What do some plants produce that protects dormant seeds and aids in their dispersal?
fruit

In a generator, work done to turn the coil is converted to what type of energy?
electric

What do you call a pattern of stars in the night sky?
constellation

An antigen is a macromolecule that reacts with components of what?
immune system

The measure of a substances entropy at 25 degrees celsius is known as it's?
standard entropy

Gastric emptying is regulated by both the stomach and what other digestive structure?
duodenum

What is the type of cell division where the number of chromosomes is reduced in half?
meiosis

What is the most common cause of lung cancer?
tobacco smoke exposure

Some consumers such as the mushroom get their energy from what?
dead organic matter

What does the second number in a blood pressure reading measure?
diastolic pressure

The rock of the mantle is mostly what?
peridotite

Ocean ridges formed by marine invertebrates living in warm shallow waters within the photic zone of the ocean are called what?
coral reefs

What compound is formed when there are sparking electrical equipment?
ozone

What is the number of protons in the nucleus?
atomic number

What organism is at the top of the energy pyramid?
carnivore

What structure of the heart receives oxygen-poor blood from the body, then pumps the blood into the right ventricle?
right atrium

Which organelle is often compared to a post office, moving proteins and lipids to where they need to go?
the golgi apparatus

What takes both the shape and the volume of their container?
gases

What is the lowest level of organization that can perform all activities required for life?
the cell

Where are most of the organs contained in insects?
the abdomen

The appendicular skeleton is made up of all bones of the upper and lower what?
limbs

What can be thought of as the capacity a device has for storing charge?
capacitance

What do electromagnetic receptors detect?
electromagnetic radiation

Nutrients from food are absorbed by the blood for transport around the body as part of what system?
digestive

What occurs when plants release water vapor through stomata (leaf pores)?
transpiration

The stomach mucosa’s epithelial lining consists only of surface mucus cells, which secrete a protective coat of what?
alkaline mucus

A substance too big to be pumped across the cell membrane may enter or leave the cell by what method?
vesicle transport

What is the process in which unstable nuclei become stable by emitting particles and energy and changing to different elements called?
radioactive decay

Most taste buds on the tongue are associated with nipple-shaped projections called what?
papillae

What is the lowest energy state of the atom called?
ground state

What kind of diseases involve the immune system accidentally attacking healthy body cells?
autoimmune

Bacteria may divide several what an hour?
times

The partial pressure of each gas in a mixture is proportional to its what?
mole fraction

The combination decomposition or rearrangement of elements and compounds to form new substances is known as?
chemical changes

When is melatonin secreted?
at night

In which phase do the chromosomes duplicate?
interphase

Which muscle is a band-like muscle that extends from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial side?
sartorius

Filter feeders, such as sponges, pump water into their body through what structures?
pores

What are ionic solutes?
electrolytes

As with other organic compounds that form hydrogen bonds, water solubility of amines is reflected in the length of what?
carbon chains

What is the tubular passageway through which the embryo or fetus leaves the mother’s body during birth?
vagina

What has the average global temperature done since the 1900s?
risen

An solid object with an irregular shape can be measured via what method?
displacement

Deterioration of limestone occurs more rapidly as the concentration of what increases?
air pollutants

In which order does the reactivity of halogen group decline?
top to bottom

Photosynthesis converts carbon dioxide and water into what?
glucose

Which genetic disorder results in the inability of melanocytes to produce melanin?
albinism

Most diseases caused by bacteria can be cured by which medicines?
antibiotics

What season do the largest waves for surfers typically come?
winter

The peripheral nervous system has major nerves that travel through every part of the body except which two places?
brain and spinal cord

Each nitrogenous base has one or two rings that include which atoms?
nitrogen

Pluto's orbit is so elliptical that sometimes it is inside the orbit of which planet?
neptune

More than half the compounds produced by the chemical industry are what?
synthetic polymers

What is it called when electrons are shared equally?
nonpolar bonds

Ribosomes are cellular substructures where what are synthesized?
proteins

How long can carbon be stored in sedimentary rock?
millions of years

What do you call an animal in which the embryo, often termed a joey, is born immature and must complete its development outside the mother's body?
marsupial

What is the most important element to life?
carbon

The idea of evolution has been around for centuries. in fact, it goes all the way back to the ancient greek philosopher named?
aristotle

When a balloon is rubbed against hair, why do they attract each other?
opposite electron charge

Living things get energy from food in a process called respiration, which releases what gas back into the atmosphere?
carbon dioxide

What is the name of the scientific field that deals with the general study of the solid earth?
geology

What kind of enzyme is phosphofructokinase?
allosteric

Covering about 16 percent of the moon's surface, maria are dark, solid, flat areas consisting of what substance?
lava

Sickle cell disease is caused by production of an abnormal type of what?
hemoglobin

Who first proposed that earth is a magnet?
william gilbert

Which atomic model shows that the distances of electrons from the nucleus is not a fixed value?
the quantum model

What is it called when breaks in bone occur that is usually caused by excessive stress on the bone?
fractures

What crystals consist of molecules at the lattice points of the crystal, held together by relatively weak intermolecular forces?
molecular crystals

What causes continents to drift closer to the poles or the equator?
plate movements

What is the major selective advantage of myelination?
space efficiency

What debated therapy offers a potential method for replacing neurons lost to injury or disease?
stem cell therapy

How many types of simple machines are there?
six types

After dispersal of a seed, what next step may occur if environmental conditions are favorable?
germination

What is the term for the smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of that element?
atom

What are insect parasites transmitted sexually?
pubic lice

What type of energy is used when a roller coaster runs downhill?
kinetic energy

In what process is atp created by glycolysis, without oxygen?
fermentation

What helps deposit the material in caves as stalactites, stalagmites, and columns
groundwater

A recent deadly explosion in the gulf of mexico exemplified what source of ocean pollution?
oil spill

Plants supply, ultimately, most of the food eaten by terrestrial animals, along with what gas?
oxygen

Chemical reactions are typically written to imply that they proceed in one direction - if they can occur in either direction, they are considered what?
reversible

Single-celled eukaryotes that share some traits with animals are also called?
eukaryotes

Antibiotics can be used to fight what, in general?
bacteria

An organism that carries pathogens from one individual to another is called what?
vector

What fills the epidermal cells that make up fingernails and toenails?
keratin

What is the name for a parasite that causes disease?
pathogen

What type of map shows the elevation and features in an area?
topographic

What are organelles made of protein and ribosomal rna (rrna)?
ribosomes

What are major temperature zones primarily based on?
latitute

What type of muscle is found in the walls of other internal organs such as the stomach?
smooth muscle

A visual "copy" of an object that is formed by reflected or refracted light is called what?
image

From the pharynx, air next passes through what structure, also known as the voice box because it contains vocal cords?
larynx

Vertebrates are all chordates that have a what?
backbone

What do structures of the human eye collect and focus?
light

Different elements differ in the size, mass, and other properties of what fundamental structures?
atoms

Breasts are considered accessory organs of what body system?
female reproductive system

Because plants lack what kind of system, their first line of defense is usually the death of cells surrounding infected tissue to prevent spread of infection?
immune system

What type of cells make up tumors?
cancer cells

When leaves wilt, what plant process ceases?
photosynthesis

What type of tissue makes up much of the inside of a plant?
ground tissue

Saliva can carry the hiv virus, but it won't spread it, unless the saliva gets into what?
bloodstream

Does blood flow increase or decrease when blood vessels constrict?
decrease

What is venus covered in a thick layer of?
clouds

What type of aquifer is trapped between two impermeable rock layers?
confined

Name the multi-phase process in which the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell divides?
mitosis

What is the term for the basic contractile unit of the muscle?
sarcomere

What are chemical messengers that control sexual development and reproduction?
sex hormones

What are species that are first to colonize a disturbed area called?
pioneer species

What planet is the easiest to observe?
mars

Where does the heartbeat originate in vertebrates?
the heart

What is a process where some substances called reactants change chemically into different substances called products?
chemical reaction

Cellulose is the main structural component of what part of the plant cell, and makes up over thirty percent of plant matter?
cell wall

What is a push or a pull acting on an object?
force

Which organ will bladder infections commonly damage if untreated?
kidney

What is the acid that is released by the stomach that kills most pathogens that enter the stomach?
hydrochloric acid

What occurs when force is applied to a moving object?
acceleration

Smooth, cardiac, and skeletal are all types of what?
muscle

What group of elements does sodium belong to?
alkali metals

Pure constructive interference and pure destructive interference are distinguished by whether or not identical waves are what?
in phase

The process of photosynthesis uses chlorophyll, which is located in organelles called what?
chloroplasts

What kind of oily substance is secreted from sebaceous glands?
sebum

Some reactions need extra help to occur quickly. they need another substance called what?
a catalyst

What have approximately the same mass as protons but no charge?
neutrons

Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling can indicate whether a suspected genetic disorder is present at what stage?
fetal

What do you call aquatic biomes in the ocean?
marine biomes

The reaction of which body system causes food allergies?
immune system

Leaving tampons in for too long can put you at risk of what syndrome?
toxic shock

There are three flat skeletal muscles in the antero-lateral wall of what?
abdomen

The dead, dry stratum corneum is the most superficial layer of what and is the layer exposed to the outside environment?
epidermis

What protein is produced when a plasma cell is stimulated by antigens?
immunoglobulin

An unbalanced force on an object in motion causes what?
acceleration

Partial albinism results from a mutation in an enzyme that is involved in the production of what?
melanin

Where does a baby travel to after leaving the uterus?
birth canal

Name an important natural resource in and of itself.
biodiversity

In classical conditioning, a response called the conditioned response is associated with what?
conditioned stimulus

What kind of bonds does boron form rather than metallic lattices?
multicenter

What broad group of living things serves as the major producers in terrestrial biomes?
plants

Birds that move pollen from flower to flower are called what?
pollinators

The major cause of outdoor air pollution is the burning of?
fossil fuels

What is the ideal mechanical advantage in the single fixed pulley?
1

What science is the study of matter and the changes it undergoes?
chemistry

What is driven by the sun's energy and moves water over the surface of earth?
the water cycle

What are materials that are poor thermal conductors called?
thermal insulators

Balanced chemical reactions are balanced in what?
terms of moles

The autonomic nervous system serves as the relay between what and the internal organs?
central nervous system

The role that a particular species plays in its ecosystem is also known as what?
niche

What element has the atomic number 16?
sulfur

Name the most famous satellite of the earth?
the moon

What is the minimum number of loops a circuit can have?
1

What type of organism is algae?
bacteria (cyanobacteria)

When water slows down, it starts depositing sediment, starting with which particles first?
largest

Because they control many cell activities - as well as being controlled by feedback mechanisms - what substances are very important for homeostasis?
hormones

Contraction of what large, sheet-like muscle results in inhalation?
diaphragm

What type of ionic compound is formed from acid and bases reacting with each other?
salt

The iron ion used to bind oxygen is on what type of "ring"?
porphyrin ring

In police radar, a radar gun sends out short bursts of which waves?
microwaves

Oxides of small, highly charged ions of what type tend to be acidic?
metal

A lewis acid is a substance that accepts a pair of electrons to form what?
covalent bond

What is the amount of force pushing against a given area?
pressure

What is another word for seed plants?
gymnosperm

What process takes place when echinoderms release their gametes into the water?
fertilization

Salt hydrolysis is a reaction in which one of the ions from a salt reacts with what?
water

Do motile cilia usually occur in small or large numbers on the cell surface?
large

Potassium is a soft, silvery metal that ignites explosively in what?
water

When a solid substance is involved in a chemical reaction, only the matter from which part of the solid is exposed to other reactants?
the surface

Which word describes how an extracellular solution can change the volume of a cell by affecting osmosis?
tonicity

The process where eroded material is dropped somewhere is called?
deposition

What was the first amino acid to be isolated?
asparagine

Where is the food stored before being mixed with the chyme?
fundus of the stomach

What kind of biome or climate might you find very close to the earth's poles, as well as up on high mountains?
tundra

What type of waves travel through the body of a planet?
body waves

What type of energy occurs by splitting the nuclei of radioactive uranium?
nuclear

Like skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle is what?
striated

Rising and falling levels of what will result in progression of the ovarian and menstrual cycles?
hormones

What is the term for how much matter is packed into a given space?
density

Phototrophic organisms capture light energy from the sun and convert it into what type of energy inside their cells?
chemical energy

What is an animal that picks up pollen on its body and carries it to another flower called?
pollinator

How many bones make up an adult human skeleton?
206

The process in which a sperm unites with an egg is called?
fertilization

What is the term for the height of the wave?
amplitude

When a plant has what deficiency, guard cells may lose turgor and close stomata?
water

What is a combination of two or more substances in any proportions called?
mixture

What does subduction of a plate lead to?
melting and volcanism

The mixture of gases that surrounds the planet and makes up the atmosphere is known as ________.
air

What system protects the soft organs of the body?
skeletal system

Before the atmosphere became oxygenated, the planet was subjected to what harmful energy source, meaning the first organisms would have flourished where they were more protected?
radiation

Turbulent sounds, at the onset of blood flow when the cuff pressure becomes sufficiently small are called?
korotkoff sounds

What is the simple sugar that living things us to store energy?
glucose

Reversing the orientation of a chromosomal segment is called what?
inversions

What does the clitellum secrete, while the sperm received are stored temporarily?
cocoon of mucus

What forms when water vapor condenses around particles in the air?
clouds

The cycle of copper reacting is a good example of what principle?
conservation of mass

A ramp is an example of what?
inclined plane

What kind of muscle is responsible for hollow organs contracting?
smooth muscle

In vascular plants, do primary roots grow downward or to the side?
downward

What type of light has shorter wavelengths than visible light and has enough energy to kill bacteria?
ultraviolet

What characteristic of the endothelium structure minimizes resistance to the flow of blood?
smooth surface

What type of bonds contain atoms that possess either a partial positive or a partial negative charge?
polar bonds

The body contains how many types of muscle tissue?
three

The eyes of all vertebrates possess a single one of these structures?
lens

The final stage of labor is delivery of the what?
placenta

All proteins are made of monomers called what?
amino acids

What system consists of all the muscles of the body?
muscular

Photoautotrophs and chemoautotrophs are two basic types of what?
autotrophs

Many genetic disorders are caused by mutations in one or a few of?
genes

In some cases, the nervous system directly stimulates endocrine glands to release hormones, which is referred to as what?
neural stimuli

What kind of reproduction results in offspring that are generally all genetically different?
sexual

When traveling through space what do mechanical waves lose?
energy

How many types of major tissues do modern plants have?
three

How does a reduced sweating ability affect elderly people?
extreme heat intolerance

What substance do developing seeds produce which promotes fruit growth?
auxin

Different clouds are associated with different types of what?
weather conditions

The testes produce sperm and secrete what?
testosterone

Friction does negative work and removes some of the energy the person expends and converts it to which kind of energy?
thermal

What happens when forces of evolution work over a long period of time?
macroevolution

What measurement is used to describe the amount of water vapor in the air?
humidity

Sebaceous glands produce an oily substance called what?
sebum

In what kind of a series does the genetic code work?
three-letter codes

Free-flowing electrons enable what materials to conduct electricity and heat very well?
metals

What is the difference in voltage across a resistor or other electrical devices called?
voltage drop

What is the science that describes the ancestral and descendant connections between organisms?
phylogeny

According to collision theory, particles that lack what kind of energy may collide, but the particles will simply bounce off one another unchanged?
kinetic energy

Muscles that move what long bone originate on the pelvic girdle?
femur

In an atom, what is determined by electron distribution in shells?
chemical behavior

What term is defined as a way of writing very large or small numbers that uses exponents?
scientific notation

Electrons are always added to which energy level first?
the lowest

What type of symmetry do echinoderms show?
radial

Nails cover the tips of what?
fingers and toes

Which carrier molecule becomes less effective at binding oxygen as temperature increases?
hemoglobin

What is found at the top of the stamen?
pollen

What field of study is called the language of science?
mathematics

What is the term for  tough, flexible connective tissue that contains the protein collagen?
cartilage

Liquid water changing to water vapor is called?
evaporation

What is used to prevent some infectious diseases?
vaccines

The change in the characteristics of living things over time is known as _________
evolution

What provides building materials for the body?
food

What is the term for animals that eat producers to get energy?
herbivores

Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly, but nearby objects are?
blurry

Melting ice and grinding wood into sawdust are examples of what?
physical changes

In humans and other multicellular organisms, different types of what basic structures are specialized for specific jobs?
cells

How much unpolarized light does a polarized filter block?
50%

What is the term for cellular eating?
phagocytosis

Genes are used to make mrna by the process of transcription; mrna is used to synthesize proteins by the process of what?
translation

What is the most important way that humans communicate?
language

Somatic, autonomic, and enteric structures are part of what system?
nervous system

Duckweed and cattails serve what role in the food chain in freshwater biomes?
primary producer

If humans were to artificially intervene and fertilize the egg of a bald eagle with the sperm of an african fish eagle and a chick did hatch, that offspring, called a hybrid (a cross between two species), would probably be this?
infertile

What causes lightning during a thunderstorm?
difference in charge

The human heart is located within what cavity?
thoracic

What is the name of the symbiotic relationship in which one species benefits while the other species is not affected?
commensalism

Living things need to take in nutrients so that they can grow and create what?
energy

Common forms of what include light, chemical and heat, along with kinetic and potential?
energy

What is the job of hemoglobin in the body?
transports oxygen

What are the most numerous and diverse biochemical compounds?
proteins

Loss of what eventually threatens other species not impacted directly, because of their interconnectedness; as species disappear from an ecosystem others are threatened by changes in available resources?
biodiversity

How many centimeters are in a meter?
100

What is the term of a phase change if solid water has it's average kinetic energy increased to change it to liquid water?
melting

What type of animals are known for being playful and frisky?
sea otters

Virtually all of the effects of pregnancy can be attributed in some way to the influence of what?
hormones

A mass suspended by a wire is a simple type of what and undergoes simple harmonic motion for amplitudes less than about 15 degrees?
pendulum

The structure of the gas carbon dioxide consists of one atom of carbon and two atoms of what?
oxygen

What type of numerical figure is important in considering the precision and accuracy of a number?
significant

What rod provides stiffness to counterbalance the pull of muscles?
notochord

What type of cell does the sperm cell fertilize?
egg

Where does the most important monsoon in the world occur?
southern asia

What is the earliest reptile?
hylonomus

Which side of the heart does blood from the lungs enter into?
left atrium

Smog is a visible form of what?
air pollution

Which therapy uses viruses to genetically modify diseased cells and tissues?
viral therapy

Radiotherapy is effective against cancer because cancer cells reproduce rapidly and, consequently, are more sensitive to this?
radiation

What type of cells are multiple small spaces located in the right and left sides of the ethmoid bone?
ethmoid air cells

When what element - whose name means "light bringing" - was first isolated, scientists noted that it glowed in the dark and burned when exposed to air?
phosphorus

Digestive enzymes secreted in the acidic environment (low ph) of the stomach help break down what?
proteins

The majority of solids are what in nature?
crystalline

What are the most abundant unicellular algae in the oceans?
chryosophytes

What term is used to describe the cellular structures responsible for protein synthesis?
ribosomes

What is the sun classified as on the main sequence?
yellow dwarf

The term science comes from a latin word that means?
having knowledge

Lymph vessels, like veins, have what objects that prevent the backflow of fluid?
valves

Veins subdivide repeatedly and branch throughout what?
mesophyll

What is the term for heat being transferred from molecule to molecule?
conduction

What is a group of organs that work together to do the same job?
an organ system

What are specialized cells that are capable of sending electrical as well as chemical signals?
neurons

What did sir isaac newton's famous law help people understand?
gravity

Compounds containing an atom of what element, bonded in a hydrocarbon framework, are classified as amines?
nitrogen

What line of latitude is an equal distance from both the north and south poles?
equator

What type of graph is useful for showing percents of a whole?
circle graphs

What substances affect the brain and influence how a person feels, thinks, or acts?
psychoactive drugs or drugs

The reaction rate usually increases as the concentration of what increases?
reactants

Atoms are composed of negatively charged electrons and a positively charged what?
nucleus

Communication is any way that animals share what?
information

What do the muscles of the gastrointestinal tract do?
keep food moving

What is the fan-like superior region that forms the largest part of the hip bone and is united to the sacrum at the largely immobile sacroiliac joint?
ilium

What do jellyfish lack in their nervous system?
true brain

Ingestive protists extend their cell wall and cell membrane around the food item, forming a what?
food vacuole

What type of flowers offer no reward, such as nectar, to a male wasp?
ophrys

If an abnormal cell is not prevented from dividing and it divides uncontrollably, what forms?
tumor

Vertebrates have evolved more complex digestive systems, with some species having multi-chambered types of what organ?
stomach

A trait controlled by a single gene that has two alleles is given what name, after the scientist who studied inheritance?
mendelian trait

What law states that energy cannot be created or destroyed?
conservation of energy

How do mammals generate heat?
maintaining high metabolism

What are small, icy objects that have very elliptical orbits around the sun?
comets

Is the most basic what is the most basic of the sciences, concerning itself with energy, matter, space and time, and their interactions?
physics

Which is the active ingredient of cereal crop disease, ergot?
lysergic acid

What type of structures evolved to do the same job by unrelated organisms?
analogous structures

What explains the spherical shape of ceres, once thought to be the largest asteroid?
high gravity

What measures the height of the largest seismic wave or earth quakes?
richter scale

What type of winds are created when more solar energy strikes the equator than the polar regions?
global winds

Reptiles and birds are the only known living descendants of what?
dinosaurs

Organism's changing over time is called?
evolution

The law of conservation mass states that matter cannot be created or what?
destroyed

What help should you use for disposing hazardous products?
guidelines on label

Although surface waves are slowest, they do most of the damage of what event?
earthquake

Fruit begins to ripen because what gas is released?
ethylene

Winter storms develop from what, which form at high altitudes and are associated with hurricanes as well?
cyclones

Fungi absorb nutrients from the environment through what?
mycelia

What do you call any process in which excess water or wastes are removed from the body?
excretion

Earth's temperature will increase further as more of what colorfully nicknamed gases are put into the atmosphere?
greenhouse gases

What happens to cells in a hypertonic solution as water leaves the cell via osmosis?
shrinkage

Digestion and respiration are both facilitated by the pharynx, more commonly called the what?
throat

What muscle is found only in the walls of the heart?
cardiac muscle

The wave on a guitar string is transverse. the sound wave rattles a sheet of paper in a direction that shows the sound wave is what?
longitudinal

How do leaves export sugar to roots and other nonphotosynthetic parts of the plant?
veins

Some metals, such as gold and platinum, do not corrode easily because they are very resistant to what?
oxidation

What are floods a source of on a floodplain?
nutrients

Which process helps deaminate amino acids?
transamination

What is each half of the cerebrum called?
a hemisphere

During interphase, the cell undergoes normal growth processes while also preparing for what, by accumulating energy and building blocks of dna?
cell division

What type of species have a large effect on the balance of organisms in an ecosystem?
keystone

Which type of skeleton supports the animal, protects internal organs, and allows for movement?
internal

After cell division what are the two new cells called?
daughter cells

What are bacteria and archaea examples of?
prokaryotes

What gives a coil of copper wire the ability to conduct electricity well?
metallic bonds

Blood helps maintain homeostasis by stabilizing ph, temperature, osmotic pressure, and by eliminating this?
excess heat

During sexual reproduction, the macronucleus dissolves and is replaced by what?
micronucleus

When naming this type of ion the ending of the element’s name is dropped and replaced with the – ide suffix?
anions

What is a random change in an organism's genes?
mutation

Osseous tissue - the connective tissue that includes specialized cells, mineral salts, and collagen fibers - makes up what?
bone

What is the name of the hollow nerve cord along the back of chordates?
notochord

What term is used to describe the amount of space occupied by a sample of matter?
volume

What are responsible for the bending movements of the organelle?
dyneins

What  are formed when primary pollutants interact with sunlight, air, or each other?
secondary pollutants

The first reaction of the body to tissue damage or infection is called the what response?
inflammatory

Because these components of the endocrine system are transported via blood, they get diluted and are present in low concentrations when they act on their target cells.
hormones

Which theory explains how populations of organisms can change over time?
evolution by natural selection

What forms when the dna in the nucleus wraps around proteins?
chromosomes

What is the condition called where pimples form on the skin?
acne

Whose laws of motion are the foundation of dynamics?
newton

Mutualism is a symbiotic relationship in which both species do what?
benefit

What do you call a substance that cannot be broken down to other substances by chemical reactions.?
an element

What weather term describes what the temperature feels like when the wind is taken into account?
windchill

What device uses electromagnetic induction to change the voltage of electric current?
electric transformer

What layer of soil usually does not have very small particles like clay?
topsoil

Which type of glaciers form in high mountains and travel through valleys?
alpine glaciers

What two types of junctions do animal cells have?
tight and gap

Where does digestion take place within an incomplete digestive system?
gastrovascular cavity

Natural selection cannot create new variations in organisms - these new variations must be created by what, which are usually associated with some sort of abnormality?
mutation

Gene expression is regulated primarily at the what level?
transcriptional

What nullified the idea that all biological catalysts are proteins?
discovery of ribozymes

A tadpole turns into what land mammal?
a frog

In physics, what do you call devices that make work easier?
machines

Mars appears red because of large amounts of which element in the soil?
iron

What type of rocks are laid down horizontally with the oldest at the bottom?
sedimentary

What are two types of frozen percipitation?
snow and hail

The bond between the two nitrogen atoms is a what?
triple bond

What are the two most common silicates?
feldspar and quartz

Starch is a large, complex carbohydrate made of thousands of _____ joined together?
glucose units (monomers)

Newly duplicated chromosomes are divided into two daughter nuclei during what stage?
mitosis

As an erythrocyte matures in the red bone marrow, it extrudes its nucleus and most of its other what?
organelles

What is the tube-like device used to reliably measure lower levels of radiation?
geiger counter

The conducting zone of the respiratory system includes the organs and structures not directly involved in what?
gas exchange

Aflatoxins are toxic, carcinogenic compounds released by fungi of this?
genus aspergillus

Four haploid spermatids form during meiosis from what?
the primary spermatocyte

Like people with type 1 diabetes, people with type 2 diabetes must frequently check what level?
blood sugar

Many species in rhizaria are among the organisms referred to as what?
amoebas

What is the amount actually produced in a reaction called?
actual yield

Each group of organisms went through its own evolutionary journey, called what?
phylogeny

What term refers to the emission of material or energy from an atom's nucleus?
radioactivity

Which feature in maps allows users to make corrections between magnetic north and true north?
double compass rose

What is the term for the maintenance of a steady state despite internal and external changes?
homeostasis

Any structure inside a cell that is enclosed by a membrane is called?
an organelle

The earliest vertebrates were jawless what?
fish

In which kind of water can less carbon dioxide dissolve?
warm water

The cochlea is a shell-like structure that is full of fluid and lined with nerve cells called what?
hair cells

What is an electrically neutral compound with positive and negative ions?
ionic compound

Which direction does the sun, moon, and stars appear to travel?
east to west

Sulfate is used as a cleaning agent because it is acidic and soluble in what substance?
water

Triceps and biceps muscles in the upper arm are an example of what type of muscle relationship?
opposing

Internal metabolism and the external environment are the sources of heat for what?
thermoregulation

What is another term for stored energy?
potential energy

What  occur when elements switch places in compounds?
replacement reactions

What does the human heart do?
pump blood

What bond is the force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions?
ionic

There are five primary tastes in humans: sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and what?
umami

Are birds and mammals mainly exothermic or endothermic?
endothermic

What are the high points in a transverse wave called?
crests

Chemistry and physics are fields in what type of science?
physical

Pyramids of net production and biomass reflect what level of efficiency?
low

The rate of flow of charge in an electrical circuit is known as what?
current

The vertebrate endoskeleton can also be called what?
internal skeleton

What can be used to speed up biochemical reactions?
enzymes

The abundance of this substance in the atmosphere is what most scientist agree that is causing global warming?
carbon dioxide

Most cases of syphilis can be cured with what?
antibiotics

How can people access water in an aquifer that does not flow from a spring or a geyser?
dig a well

What is the term for animals that have a backbone?
vertebrates

What type of animal that eats only or mainly insects?
heterotrophic

What do you call the zone in a body of water where there is too little sunlight for photosynthesis?
aphotic zone

The sweat glands of the armpit are classified as these?
apocrine glands

Chitin is a substance that is found in what part of animals like beetles and lobsters?
shell

What kind of air does a continental polar air mass hold?
cold dry air

What do you call taxes placed on products that produce carbon dioxide?
carbon taxes

What does the coefficient in front of an element in a formula indicate?
how much is involved in the reaction

Behaviors that occur naturally and are not learned are called what?
innate

Which is the dominant stage of the lifecycle of a fern?
sporophyte

What is a specific region in space within which a sensory receptor is responsive to stimuli?
receptive field

What changes from heat or pressure during metamorphism?
minerals

Do most substances increase or decrease in size when they change from a liquid to a solid?
decrease

The highest point of a wave is called?
crest

What is the smallest part of an element called?
atom

Dermal tissue covers the outside of a plant in a single layer of cells called what?
the epidermis

After fluid collects in nephron tubules in the kidney, where does it move to?
the bladder

What are external skeletons known as?
exoskeletons

What is the name for the process where data in the genes is transferred to amino acids?
translation

What play an important role in the modulation of the nuclear chain reaction?
control rods

What preventative measure is often delivered by injection into the arm?
vaccine

From observations as simple as blowing up a balloon, it is clear that increasing the amount of gas increases what else?
the volume

What is the scientific term for the amount of light reflected by a surface?
albedo

What part of the muscle fibers cause shortening and contraction?
myofibrils

How many electrons are in the hydrogen atom?
one

If a solution contains so much solute that its solubility limit is reached, the solution is said to be what?
saturated

What term describes waves that transfer energy through matter?
mechanical waves

What is the name of the mechanism in which sounds are encoded in microwaves by changing their frequency?
frequency modulation

Grasses such as wheat, rice, and corn are examples of fibrous root systems. fibrous root systems are found in monocots; tap root systems are found in these?
dicots

Humans have about 20,000 to 22,000 genes scattered among 23 of these?
chromosomes

What is the term for the use of radioactive decay to estimate the ages of fossils and rock?
radioactive dating

On which ridge does iceland sit?
mid-atlantic ridge

How are the major families of organic compounds characterized?
their functional groups

What do chemotrophs extract energy from?
chemical compounds

Involved in balance, the semicircular canals are parts of what organs?
ears

Injuries can be prevented by getting proper what?
rest and recovery

Some leaves are attached to the plant stem by a petiole. leaves that do not have a petiole and are directly attached to the plant stem are called this?
sessile leaves

What is water vapor density known as?
humidity

What is the name for the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching?
conduction

The mean free path for a gaseous molecule will be hundreds of times the what of the molecule?
diameter

What is the most common fossil fuel?
coal

The weather conditions in an area over time is also called a what?
climate

Chemical symbols are useful to concisely represent the elements present in a substance. the letters usually come from the name of what?
element

Cell transport refers to the movement of substances across what structure?
cell membrane

What term describes the rate at which a device changes electric current to another form of energy?
electric power

What happens when a sodium atom loses an electron?
becomes sodium ion

When a fluorine atom gains an electron, it becomes a negative what?
fluoride ion

The endocrine system consists of cells, tissues, and organs that secrete what critical to homeostasis?
hormones

What is formed when two dna strands link together in an antiparallel direction and are twisted?
double helix

Particles of a gas are constantly moving and bumping into things. this gives gases what?
pressure

Which part of a leaf contains openings known as stomata, through which the exchange of gases takes place?
epidermis

Which system transports oxygens to cells?
circulatory system

What is the part of a plant whose primary role is to collect sunlight and make food by photosynthesis?
leaves

Technically, any redox reaction can be set up to make a what?
voltaic cell

What percentage of all species that ever lived on earth have gone extinct?
99%

What is the diffusion of water known as?
osmosis

What is it called when plants release water vapor through their leaves?
transpiration

Earth goes through regular changes in its position relative to?
the sun

A symporter carries how many different molecules or ions in the same direction?
two

Large amounts of fuel are stored in skeletal muscles, adipose tissues and what organ?
liver

Intrusive igneous rocks cool from magma slowly in the crust and have large what?
crystals

What is the term used for the ability of salamanders to grow back lost limbs and other body parts?
regeneration

A winter storm is called what?
blizzard

The trochophre, a unique larval form, is found in the life cycle of which animal classification.
mollusks

Within organs, arteries branch into what small vessels that convey blood to the capillaries?
arterioles

Diamond is extremely hard because of the strong bonding between ______ in all directions?
carbon atoms

Vertebrates. from the smallest of fish to us. one of the main features we all have in common is our what?
backbone

The fight or flight response and similar responses are controlled by what part of the nervous system?
autonomous

Deposition refers to when a gas changes to what state?
solid

Nuclear changes occur with a simultaneous release of what, and a slight drop in mass?
energy

The way of learning that involves reward and punishment is called?
conditioning

The sodium-potassium pump is an active transport pump that exchanges sodium ions for what?
potassium ions

Mass multiplied by velocity equals what force?
momentum

How many years ago did early amniotes diverge into two groups?
320 million years

The intensity or rate of radiation emission _________  with temperature?
increases

For the most part, cognitive functions reside where?
the cortex

What is the term for the force exerted by circulating blood on the walls of blood vessels?
blood pressure

What does the precise pattern of a crystal depend on?
compound

Learning to get used to something after being exposed to it for a while is associated with what kind of learning?
habituation

Is the digestive tract of many sharks longer or shorter than many other vertebrates?
shorter

In the case of the thyroid hormone pathway, thyroid hormone itself carries out what kind of feedback?
negative

What increases the size of a population's gene pool?
mutations

The heart and the arteries and veins are associated with what system of the body?
cardiovascular

What do scientists believe are the oldest eukaryotes?
protists

What are used to balance chemical equations?
coefficients

Endothermic and exothermic reactions differ in whether the products or reactants store more of what?
chemical energy

What is the conversion of metals from their ores to more useful forms called?
metallurgy

What is the predominant stage in the life cycle of most scyphozoans?
medusa

The reaction of an alkyl halide with an inorganic hydroxide base at elevated temperature produces what?
an alcohol

What sequence is the primary structure of a protein?
amino acid sequence

What are used to lift large masses of magnetic materials such as scrap iron, rolls of steel, and auto parts?
electromagnets

Carbon behaves as a metal because it conducts which two things well?
heat and electricity

What is the first direct action of growth hormone?
stimulation of triglyceride breakdown

What contains the spore-forming asci?
the ascocarps

Fruit fly and brine shrimp hox genes have evolved independently for how long?
400 million years

Yolk is a very fragile substance found in the eggs of reptiles and needs protection.  what serves as protection for the yolk?
yolk sac

What do tadpoles change into?
adult frogs

Earthworms and segmented worms belong to what phylum?
annelida

What are most stis caused by?
bacteria

What is the term for matter that does not let any light pass through it, whether it absorbs light, reflects light, or does both?
opaque

Rain dissolves fertilizer in the soil, what carries it away?
runoff?

Each vertebral body has a large hole in the center through which the nerves of what pass?
spinal cord

Rust consists of oxides of what element?
iron

Rising air currents carry water vapor into what?
atmosphere

Echinoderms have what type of body symmetry?
radial symmetry

What is used during filtration to push fluids and solutes, from higher pressure areas to lower pressure areas?
hydrostatic pressure gradient

How many pathways do plants have for carbon fixation?
three

What type of substance is any matter that has a fixed chemical composition and characteristic properties?
pure chemical substance

Where are sperm produced in the process of spermatogenesis?
testes

What type of energy does chemosynthesis use to make food?
chemical energy

The polymerase chain reaction is a way of making copies of what?
a gene

Energy transfer between what kinds of levels is generally rather inefficient?
trophic

What kind of conditions are often inherited as simple recessive traits?
genetic disorders

Without dinoflagellate symbionts, corals lose algal pigments in a process called coral bleaching and eventually die, while corals in turn provide protection, making this what type of relationship?.
symbiotic

What is the type of reproduction where part of the parent plant is used to generate a new plant?
asexual reproduction

What is the name of the wind belt nearest the equator?
trade winds

What two phases does the cell cycle consist of?
interphase and mitotic

Atoms with the same atomic number but different mass numbers are called what?
isotopes

Sphenodontia sphenodontia (“wedge tooth”) arose in the mesozoic era and includes only one of what?
living genus

In a heterozygote with one dominant and one recessive allele, which is expressed?
dominant allele

Any sound with a frequency above the highest audible frequency is defined as what, a phenomenon useful in medical diagnosis and therapy?
ultrasound

Which organ secretes estrogen?
the ovaries

Water-soluble carboxylic acids ionize slightly in water to form these?
moderately acidic solutions

Which kind of irrigation uses much less water than other methods?
drip

Fishes were the earliest example of what subphylum, and jawless fishes were the earliest of these?
vertebrates

What three things do animals require in order to survive?
air, water, food

What is broken during catabolic reactions, such as the breakdown of complex carbohydrates into simple sugars?
bonds

The actual amount (mass) of gasoline left in the tank when the gauge hits “empty” is a lot less in the summer than in the winter. the gasoline has the same volume as it does in the winter when the “add fuel” light goes on, but because the gasoline has expanded, there is what?
less mass

What do you call pure substances with unique properties?
elements

What is the large muscle that extends across the bottom of the chest below the lungs called?
diaphragm

What is less dense then either solids or liquids?
gases

What is the term for a mountain-building event?
orogeny

A multiaxial ball-and-socket joint has much more mobility than a what hinge joint?
uniaxial

Meiosis and mitosis are both preceded by one round of what?
dna replication

What is the hollow sac like organ that stores urine until it is excreted?
bladder

What is the name of the magnetic material found in lava?
magnetite

What is a branded polymer that serves as energy storage in animal?
glycogen

Milk is usually subjected to what process, where high temperatures denature the proteins in bacteria so they cannot carry out functions needed to grow and multiply?
pasteurization

What do you call something that controls the uptake of water or another substance in the environment, in order to maintain constant internal conditions?
osmoregulators

Plastics are common examples of synthetic polymers of what abundant element?
carbon

Magnetite crystals of different ages and on different continents pointed to different spots. the simplest explanation is that the continents have done what?
moved

Protozoa can be classified on the basis of how they?
move

Biomass, solar, wind, water, and geothermal power are examples of what kinds of energy resources?
renewable

What type of gases are the least reactive of all elements?
noble

The cells of most eukaryotic and many prokaryotic organisms can carry out what type of respiration?
aerobic

What kind of rock's makeup is changed by heat and or pressure?
metamorphic

Most scientists think that ordinary matter makes up how much of the total matter in the universe?
less than half

In machines that increase force, such as ramps and doorknobs and nutcrackers, what is the relation between output and input force?
output is greater

What type of galaxies are oval shaped, red or yellow, and contain mostly old stars?
typical elliptical

What is the term for something in the environment that causes a reaction in an organism?
stimulus

What is the mildest type of brain injury?
concussion

Isobaric expansion is a process occurring without a change in what?
pressure

What is the term for the process of exposing a person to a pathogen on purpose in order to develop immunity?
vaccination

Why will water balloons launched into the air eventually burst?
expansion

What type of behaviors do not have to be learned or practiced?
innate behaviors

Terrestrial biomes are classified by the climate and their what?
biodiversity

A flower's colors come from what part of the plant?
vacuole

What stages in the life of a cell does the cell cycle include?
all

What do you call the type of molecular signals that include insulin and that help regulate a number of biochemical processes?
hormones

What type of device uses electromagnetic induction to change the voltage of electric current?
electronic transformer

Mutations cannot be passed on to offspring if they occur in what type of cells?
body cells

What layer high in the atmosphere protects living things from most of the sun’s harmful uv rays?
ozone layer

What occurs over a large area when a rock is buried or compressed?
regional metamorphism

The uterus has an external opening known as what?
vulva

Plants face two types of enemies: herbivores and what else?
pathogens

What organism carries out only fermentation or anaerobic respiration?
obligate anaerobes

What are the smallest type of blood vessel?
capillaries

What type of behavior is most flexible?
learned behavior

In the water molecule, two of the electron pairs are lone pairs rather than what?
bonding pairs

What are the  basic building blocks of the human body?
cells

What is the medial bone of the forearm that runs parallel to the radius?
ulna

The animal kingdom can also be divided into two basic groups, what are they?
invertebrates and vertebrates

These microorganisms are abundant in the human digestive track and serve many roles.  what are they?
bacteria

When both objects have a positive charge what will the force be between them?
repulsive

What are ocean waves mainly caused by?
wind

What type of archaea live in salty environments?
halophiles

What can be thought of as the fundamental unit of life?
cell

What type of organism is a bacteria?
single-celled prokaryotic

What chemical element is required for a combustion reaction ?
oxygen

What do wind turbines turn wind energy into?
electricy

A simple sugar such as fructose or glucose is also called a what?
monosaccharide

The fossilized skeleton of archaeopteryx looks like that of a dinosaur, but it had what structures modified for flight, a trait associated only with birds among modern animals?
feathers

Blood volume increases substantially during pregnancy, so that by childbirth, it exceeds its preconception volume by 30 percent, or approximately what?
1-2 liters

All of the land drained by a river system is called its basin, or what "wet" term?
watershed

What does the gizzard in birds contain that allows them to grind food?
swallowed stones

Equal and oppositely directed forces produce what kind of acceleration?
no acceleration

Organs are groups of what working together?
tissues

Deep water filling a void caused by surface winds blowing water north and south is known as?
upwelling

What devices do astronomers use to see objects at wavelengths all across the electromagnetic spectrum?
telescopes

What type of winds blow only over a limited area?
local

What is the term for the spacing of individuals within a population?
dispersion

What is the minimum number of pulleys needed for a compound pulley?
2

Magnetic force is always perpendicular to what?
velocity

What is the region in the center back of the eye that is responsible for acute vision?
fovea

What is it called when a human has an extra autosome?
trisomy

Carboxylic acids can form what with alcohols?
esters

What are the two types of semiconductors?
n-type and p-type

What is the term for organisms that live in extremely hot environments?
thermophiles

What is a capillary bed that filters blood principally based on particle size?
glomerulus

Minerals form when they precipitate from hot fluids that have done what?
cooled down

Mass spectrometry today is used extensively in chemistry and biology laboratories to identify chemical and biological substances according to their ratios of what?
mass-to-charge

What helps treat bacterial infections in people?
antibiotic drugs

Which has more electrons, neon or fluorine?
neon

What kind of process occurs naturally under certain conditions, unlike its opposite, which will not take place unless it is “driven” by the continual input of energy from an external source?
spontaneous process

Gradual degradation of a material due to its exposure to the environment is known as what?
corrosion

What is the name for a matter that has a fixed volume and a fixed shape?
solid

German doctor rudolf virchow first discovered what process when studying living cells under a microscope?
cell division

What was the first mass extinction that occurred on earth?
precambrian mass extinction

What type of habitat do ferns need to grow?
moist

G2 and s are phases in what process that is important in cell division?
mitosis

Solar energy travels in what?
photons

What type of joint is the knee joint?
hinge joint

What state of matter takes the shape and volume of whatever container it occupies?
gas

What is a high concentrated solution typically referred to as?
stock solution

The joints that are between the bones that make up the skull are what kind of joints?
immovable joints

What weather phenomenon increases the rate of weathering in rock and soil?
rainfall

What is pluto now called?
dwarf planet

Tidal volume, expiratory reserve volume, inspiratory reserve volume, and residual volume are all types of what kind of measurement?
lung volume

What kind of a relationship do plants and soil have?
two-way relationship

What is the process of generating electric current with a magnetic field?
electromagnetic induction

The adrenal cortex directly influences the function of what organs through the production of the hormone aldosterone to stimulate sodium reabsorption?
kidneys

What type of direction does a phase change depend on?
heat transfer

The strength of what depends on the concentration of hydrogen ions it produces when dissolved in water?
acid

What are the largest phylum in the animal kingdom?
arthropods

What kind of organisms are yeasts?
single-celled

What kind of bond consists of one sigma bond and one pi bond?
double bond

What is the purpose of utilizing careful farming practices such as rotating crops or planting nutrient rich crops?
improve soil quality

What do communication satellites carry and use to provide energy during their missions?
solar panels

What is the biogeochemical cycle that recycles water called?
water cycle

What type of behavior is frogs croaking or deer clashing antlers an example of?
courtship

An atom can be classified as a particular element based solely on its what?
atomic number

In the body, what essential substance is pumped from the heart into arteries and then eventually into capillaries?
blood

What (nh3) is one of the few thermodynamically stable binary compounds of nitrogen with a nonmetal?
ammonia

What does increased temperature cause the volume to do in a gas?
increase

Which effect causes winds to strike the polar front at an angle?
coriolis effect

Birds evolved from what type of ancestor?
reptile

Which blood cells serve to defend the body in various ways?
white blood cells

Eutherian mammals possess a specialized structure called the corpus callosum that links what hemispheres?
cerebral

Which part of the brain secretes hormones that tell the pituitary gland either to secrete or to stop secreting its hormones?
hypothalamus

Most reptile eggs can be laid on land, not in water and they are called what?
amniotic

What do you call a small whole number placed in front of a formula in an equation in order to balance it?
coefficient

Because the earth is covered with vegetation, cellulose is the most abundant of all what?
carbohydrates

The energy of a photon is directly proportional to the frequency of the electromagnetic what?
radiation

What term means the amount of space matter takes up?
volume

All of the stages that a cell goes through make up what?
the cell cycle

What term is used to describe birds that mate for an entire season or even stay paired for their entire life?
monogamous

What branch of science offers an overview of the physiology of humans?
human biology

In atherosclerosis, thickening of an arterial wall due to this can restrict blood flow through the artery?
plaque formation

Moist skin distinguishes frogs from what animal with dry, bumpy skin?
toads

Scientists perform experiments to test their hypotheses because sometimes the nature of natural universe is what?
not obvious

What is the term for movement toward light?
phototaxis

Ultraviolet radiation has the highest energy; which has the lowest?
infrared

What kind of proteins either activate or deactivate the transcription of other genes?
master regulatory proteins

What occurs when the pancreas doesn’t make enough insulin or else the body’s cells are resistant to the effects of insulin?
diabetes

According to the octet rule, magnesium is unstable because its valence shell has just two of what?
electrons

What make distant objects appear both nearer and larger?
telescopes

The atmosphere consists of oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, which exerts a certain pressure referred to as what?
atmospheric pressure

What is the oxygen-storing protein found in diving mammals' muscles called?
myoglobin

The modern atomic theory states that all matter is composed of what?
atoms

Pressure has a significant effect on the solubility of what state of matter?
gases

The site of some nutrient absorption, the ileum is the third part of what digestive organ?
small intestine

If both atoms are the same, they have the same electronegativity and share what type of bond?
nonpolar covalent

What forms when oceanic crust subducts into the mantle at convergent plate boundaries?
volcanic mountain ranges

The skin plays an important role in preventing the escape of what commonly found liquid from the body?
water

Which area of the human heart pumps the blood to the right ventricle?
right atrium

What moves sediments after they have formed?
erosion

What involves the emission of a particle and/or energy as one atom changes into another?
radioactive decay

Certain anaerobic parabasalid species exist in the digestive tracts of termites and wood-eating cockroaches, where they contribute an essential step in the digestion of this?
cellulose

What do you call a group of cells of the same kind that performs the same function?
tissue

What is the name of a reactant in an enzymatic reaction?
substrate

The ideal gas law is used like any other gas law, with attention paid to the unit and making sure that temperature is expressed in kelvin. however, the ideal gas law does not require a change in the conditions of a gas sample. the ideal gas law implies that if you know any three of the physical properties of a gas, you can calculate this?
fourth

What is a reaction in which an atom or molecule is added to an unsaturated molecule, making a single product?
an addition reaction

What is the main problem in both types of diabetes?
insulin production

The structure of mitochondrion plays an important role in what?
aerobic respiration

Topographic maps have a horizontal scale to indicate what distances?
horizontal

What can occur when one end of a small diameter tube is immersed in liquid?
capillary action

What kind of system do echinoderms possess?
water-based circulatory

Fossils provide a window into the past. they are evidence for what?
evolution

Dominant alleles rarely cause what type of disorders, since the mutant allele is likely to die out of the population?
genetic disorders

Near-earth asteroids cross paths with earth, meaning they could collide; what are the paths called?
orbits

Reflected in their relatively high level of intelligence and their ability to learn new behaviors, what organs tend to be relatively large in primates?
brains

This inverse relationship between solubility and temperature can be understood by looking at a what?
molecular model

Energy from sunlight enters many ecosystems through what process?
photosynthesis

What is the world’s most serious resource problem?
water scarcity

Quarks also have a different type of charge, called what?
color charge

Thylakoids in a chloroplast contain what plant pigment?
chlorophyll

The expulsion stage begins when the fetal head enters what?
birth canal

What type of waste is likely to explode?
explosive waste

Named after the dutch physicist, the van de graaff is a type of what device used for nuclear research?
accelerator

A substance that displays different colors when in the presence of an acid or a base is called what?
an acid-base indicator

What is the name for the study of the plants and animals that live in fresh water bodies ?
limnology

What does urine leave the body through?
urethra

What type of plant is the dominant group of land plants?
vascular plants

What term is used to describe a process in which material travels from regions of high concentration to low concentration until equilibrium is reached?
diffusion

Poetically speaking, nature reserves are islands of what, in a sea of habitat degraded by human activity?
biodiversity

Reactive elements are able to combine more what with other elements?
easily

What do scientists attach to aquatic animals to collect information?
satellite tags

Upon ovulation, the oocyte released by the ovary is swept into where?
uterine tube

Giardiasis and malaria are diseases caused by what organism?
protozoa

The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time is referred to as what?
wave frequency

The name carbon tetrachloride implies one carbon atom and four of which other atoms?
chlorine

Most of a mushroom's surface area is actually where?
underground

Interneurons carry what back and forth between sensory and motor neurons?
nerve impulses

What are the mineral deposits that fill in underground cracks called?
veins

Some of the small moons of saturn are found within what features distinctive to the planet?
rings of saturn

An image that is double the size of the object would have what?
magnification

What is made up of bands of cells that contract for movement?
muscle tissue

What is the name of the muscular tube that carries urine out of the body?
urethra

Tissues are organized by what?
cells

Carbon released by burning fossil fuels contributes to what effect in the atmosphere?
greenhouse effect

What are a class of biochemical compounds that living things use to store energy?
lipids

Which element has an atomic number of 16?
sulfur

Fossil evidence indicates that the ancestors of humans originated on which continent?
africa

What will spores that eventually germinate develop into?
new hyphae

A binary molecular compound is made up of two of what?
elements

Sound, like all waves, travels at a certain speed and has the properties of frequency and this?
wavelength

Do bacteria sexually reproduce?
no

What is type of sugar is produced through photosynthesis?
glucose

The light-sensing cells in the retina are called rods and what else?
cones

Lampreys possess a large round sucker, lined with teeth, that surrounds the mouth and is used to feed on what?
blood

What is the type of plant that has a single cotelydon in the seedling?
monocot

What element is essential for amino acid and nucleic acid production?
nitrogen

In plants and algae where does photosynthesis takes place in?
chloroplasts

What is crucial for the fermentation progress in making bread?
yeast

What hormone does the endocrine system secrete to help cells absorb blood sugar?
insulin

What part of the sporophyte produces microspores that form male gametophytes and megaspores that form female gametophytes?
flower

This calcification prevents diffusion of nutrients into the matrix, resulting in what dying and the opening up of cavities in the diaphysis cartilage?
chondrocytes

What is the greek word meaning "to help make things easier"?
machine

High levels of radiation can remove electrons from?
metals

What is the only planet we know that has plate techtonics?
earth

Variation in muscle cells gives further insight into some benefits of what type of respiration?
anaerobic

Violet and red are two types of what kind of light?
visible

The duodenum is a part of which part of the gi tract?
small intestine

A complete ionic equation is a chemical equation in which the dissolved ionic compounds are written as what?
separated ions

The barrier defenses are not a response to infections, but they are continuously working to protect against a broad range of what?
pathogens

A minority of people on earth use up most of the planet's what, including energy?
resources

Groundwater dissolves minerals and carries the ions in a what?
solution

What is the area of our universe that isn't stars and galaxies called?
dark matter

What neurotransmitter is associated with the fight-or-flight response?
adrenaline

What do scientists think are the oldest eukaryotes?
protists

Geologists found that the youngest rocks on the seafloor were where?
mid - ocean ridges

The stability of an ecosystem depends on the actions of what, exemplified by mushrooms on a decaying log and bacteria in soil?
decomposers

Anabolic steroids, a form of the male sex hormone testosterone, are one of the most widely known performance-enhancing drugs. steroids are used to help build what?
muscle mass

What is the only planet that is known to support life?
earth

Where is food stored?
the stomach

The vertebrae are divided into the cervical region, the thoracic region, and which other region?
lumbar region

What was used to measure the distance between the earth and the moon?
laser beam

Upon entering the vestibular canal, the pressure waves push down on what duct?
the cochlear

Water is formed from oxygen and what other element?
hydrogen

What is the period from earth's origin to the beginning of the phanerozoic eon?
precambrian

In a displacement graph, the slope of the line is the average what?
velocity

What is the process by which producers use the energy in sunlight to make food?
photosynthesis

What is the term for something that limits the growth or development of an organism, population, or process?
limiting factor

Where is glucose carried in the human body?
the blood

What are large glaciers that cover a larger area than just a valley?
ice caps

What type of reproduction do fungi engage in?
asexual

What system transports minerals and water in a plant?
roots

What is the exchange of energy from one part of the universe to another called?
heat

If environmental conditions deteriorate, many species can form protective what?
cysts

In what subgroup are oligochaetes classified?
polychaetes

The crocodilia order, which includes crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gharils, is part of what class of animals?
reptiles

What fluid is most prevalent in your body?
water

What are negative electrons attracted to?
positive protons

The largest phylum in the animal kingdom, arthropod, is primarily comprised of what?
insects

Which country is formed by a hotspot along the mid-atlantic ridge?
iceland

What is an atom or group of bonded atoms that has a positive or negative charge?
an ion

What type of reproduction produces offspring from a single parent that share the exact same genetic material as the parent?
asexual reproduction

Invertebrates make up what percentage of all animal species?
95 percent

What do monotremes lack though they have hair and produce milk?
nipples

What is muscle tissue that is attached to the bone called?
skeletal tisse

What results from the evaporation of sea water?
salt

The human body regulates the use and storage of what simple sugar, a major cellular fuel?
glucose

What planet did the voyager 1 spacecraft visit in 1980?
saturn

What is the shortest phase of the sexual response cycle?
the orgasm

What is the name of the process by which plants use energy from sunlight to synthesize carbohydrates?
photosynthesis

Animals need plants for food and?
energy

The product of a wave's wavelength and its frequency is what?
speed

How did lamarck believe species change over time?
inheritance of acquired characteristics

Which is larger: the human sperm or the human egg?
human egg

What kind of reaction is a reaction in which two or more substances combine to form a single new substance?
combination reaction

What is beyond the atmosphere?
space

What structure does methane have?
three dimensional tetrahedra

What is the blastocyst called after implantation?
an embryo

What rate is generally higher for endotherms than for ectotherms?
metabolic

What phylum includes snails, squids and clams?
mollusca

What is the change in a species over time?
evolution

What are the largest known proteins?
titins

What term is used to describe the organism that is invaded and often harmed by a pathogen?
host

Untreated botulism is typically fatal because muscles required for breathing fail to contract when the release of what chemical is blocked?
acetylcholine

The combined magnetic force of the magnetized wire coil and iron bar makes an electromagnet what?
very strong

Where do two or more bones of the skeleton meet?
joints

Lacking a bony endoskeleton, sharks, rays, and ratfish belong to what group of fish?
cartilaginous

What process involves the flow of heat from warmer objects to cooler objects?
conduction

What broad category of animals shows adaptations from water-dwelling to land-dweller, including the ability to breathe air and legs to move on land?
amphibians

What term is used to describe the tendency of a mineral to break along certain planes?
cleavage

What controls earth's magnetosphere?
magnetic field

In humans, pharyngeal slits later develop into what?
middle ear

What phenomenon involves the forcing of a substance into a cell against its concentration gradient?
primary active transport

What are used as model organisms in molecular biology and genetics?
cellular slime molds

The bones of the newborn skull are not fully ossified and are separated by large areas called what?
fontanelles

With logistic growth, how does population growth start out?
slowly

What determines the color of visible light?
exact wavelength

What do eukaryotic cells have that compartmentalize their functions?
internal membranes

Earth rotates on its axis once each day and revolves around the sun how often?
once each year

What are the two types of fatty acids?
saturated and unsaturated

Lipids are available to the body from how many sources?
three

What is a silver-colored alkaline earth metal that is even softer than calcium?
strontium

Statoliths are starch-filled plastids that enable plant roots to detect what force?
gravity

How does lysozyme destroy bacteria?
by digesting their cell walls

The primary role of leaves is to collect what?
sunlight

Temperature can be defined as the average of what type of energy of the molecules?
kinetic

What lens shape corrects myopia?
concave

What serves to replace nonreproducing specialized cells as needed in the adult body?
stem cells

In physics, resistance is opposition to the flow of what?
electrical charges

What organs are the main organs of the urinary system?
kidneys

What phase follows ovulation?
luteal phase

What is used to measure blood pressure?
sphygmomanometer

Are the lungs organs of the excretory system, the respiratory system, or both?
both

Light has the properties of both a wave and what else?
particle

Hagfishes have a skull made of what?
cartilage

Water molds are commonly found in moist soil and where else?
surface water

What is considered to be a person's entire genetic information?
genome

Where does cellular respiration occur?
mitochondria

What are jellyfish and other cnidarian's stingers called?
nematocysts

What is tube-shaped and brings urine from the kidneys to the urinary bladder?
ureters

When solvent molecules selectively pass through a membrane from a dilute solution to concentrated solution, what process is occurring?
osmosis

Water seeping into the ground is known as?
infiltration

What body system gets rid of waste?
excretory system

Through what form of energy transfer does the sun's energy travel?
radiation

What are the only regions of space that electrons can occupy?
orbits

What appears in autumn when cool air moves over a warm lake?
steam fog

All cells need what for processes like active transport?
energy

In certain populations, some of the chromosomes have become what?
fused

What occurs as a result of the discharge of static electricity?
lightning

Enzymes are a type of what, and as such, they are not reactants in the reactions they control?
catalyst

The entire volume of what is filtered through the kidneys about 300 times per day?
blood

The elements in group 2 are called what?
alkaline earth metals

What term decribes the amount of time required for half of the original material to decay in an isotope?
half-life

What occurs when water lost by transpiration is not replaced by absorbtion from room?
wilting

Molds, pollen, and pet dander are examples of air pollution with what type of source?
biological

Neurons are classified based on the direction in which they carry what?
nerve impulses

What is the process of making an observation in terms of a numerical scale and recording the value?
measurement

What makes monotremes different than other mammals?
they lay eggs

The strength of bases is measured on what scale?
ph scale

What type of isomers contain the same number of atoms of each kind but differ in which atoms are bonded to one another?
structural isomers

What is the gas that gives rotten eggs and sewage their distinctive smell?
hydrogen sulfide

What two values does a blood pressure reading include?
systolic and diastolic

In humans, what period lasts from the ninth week of development until birth?
fetal period

Where are protons found in the atom?
in the nucleus

What is produced when haploid gametes fuse in sexual reproduction?
diploid zygote

What are the two different types of vascular tissues called?
xylem and phloem

During which stage of development do all the major organs begin to form?
embryonic

At the anode, liquid chloride ions are oxidized to what?
chlorine gas

A diploid cell contains two sets of what?
chromosomes

On what basis are lipoproteins classified?
density

The two ovaries are small, oval organs on either side of what part of the body?
uterus

Gas exchange during respiration occurs primarily through what?
diffusion

Enzymes in the stomach and small intestine break down proteins into what components?
amino acids

Organisms incapable of photosynthesis that must therefore obtain energy and carbon from food by consuming other organisms are called what?
heterotrophs

What allows theories to be widely accepted?
evidence

Elements that specifically are noted to have properties of both metals and nonmetals are known as what?
metalloids

What is the measure of change in velocity of a moving object?
acceleration

What celestial events are the source of elements heavier than iron?
supernovas

Algae are similar to plants in that they both produce their food through what process?
photosynthesis

What do fungi produce to digest nutrients?
exoenzymes

When light passes from one medium to another, it changes what?
speed

The distance between the crests of electromagnetic waves is called what?
wavelength

People with celiac disease have an immune response to what, which ultimately leads to malnutrition, cramping, and diarrhea?
gluten

Chlorophyll is used in what food-making process that plants carry out?
photosynthesis

What does an ammeter measure the flow of?
current through a circuit

Burning forests, growing rice and raising livestock all cause a release of what into the atmosphere?
greenhouse gases

What type of pollution comes from sewage, storm drains, septic tanks, boats, and runoff from yards?
municipal

What does oil do when mixed with water?
forms droplets

What is the term for the movement of individuals out of a population?
emigration

What might a scientist do to confirm the work of another?
replicate their work

Polar molecules result from differences in electronegativity of what in the molecule?
atoms

A diver's air bubbles increase in size as he approaches the surface because what decreases?
water pressure

Positive charge is mostly found in what part of an atom?
nucleus

In the lens makers' equation, diverging lenses and virtual images are associated with what kinds of numbers?
negative numbers

What is another name for producers?
autotrophs

Consisting of a stigma, style, and ovary, the pistil of a flower is what type of organ?
female reproductive organ

Chewing insects such as dragonflies and grasshoppers have how many sets of jaws?
two

What kind of change occurs whenever matter changes into an entirely different substance with different chemical properties?
chemical change

What is a small, relatively simple single-celled organism called?
prokaryote

The golgi apparatus works like a mail room by receiving and sending what?
proteins

Which part of the body has mucus and hair to trap dust and also warms and moistens air so to not harm lung tissue?
the nose

What are the structures in the cytoplasm where proteins are made?
ribosomes

What is the key issue in the small-population approach?
genetic variation

What is the minimum depth in the aphotic zone?
200 meters

What is the process by which plants gain energy and produce sugar?
photosynthesis

What are embedded in the membranes of b cells and bind a variety of antigens through their variable regions?
b cell receptors

A statement that describes what always happens under certain conditions in nature is also known as what?
scientific law

What developmental stage do alligators lack that most other amphibians have?
larval stage

What attaches a muscle to a bone?
tendons

What are two common weather characteristics of hurricanes?
high winds and rainfall

What kind of organism causes the often fatal lung disease tuberculosis?
bacteria

Where do plates move apart in oceans and on land?
divergent plate boundaries

Zeros that appear in front of all of the nonzero digits are called what?
left-end zeros

What consists of thylakoid membranes surrounded by stroma?
a chloroplast

Portable amplifiers have batteries that store what type of energy?
chemical energy

The movement of ice causes glaciers to have cracks referred to as?
crevasses

A muscle can return to its original length when relaxed due to a quality of muscle tissue called what?
elasticity

What feature of the spine helps with flexibility and strength?
curves

How does a cell's membrane keep extracellular materials from mixing with it's internal components?
provides a barrier

Respiratory development in the embryo begins around week 4. ectodermal tissue from the anterior head region invaginates posteriorly to form olfactory pits, which fuse with endodermal tissue of the developing pharynx. an olfactory pit is one of a pair of structures that will enlarge to become this?
nasal cavity

Anything that occupies space and has mass is known as what?
matter

The temperature dependence of solubility can be exploited to prepare what solutions of certain compounds?
supersaturated

Glasses are mixtures of oxides, the main component of which is silica (sio2). silica is called the glass former, while additives are referred to as this?
glass modifiers

What type of tissue produces and secretes several hormones involved in lipid metabolism and storage?
adipose tissue

What is the process in which organ systems work to maintain a stable internal environment?
homeostasis

What must people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes frequently check?
blood glucose levels

What is it called when two alleles are both expressed in the heterozygous individual?
codominance

What part of a spider is equipped with poison glands?
chelicerae

Esters are neutral compounds that undergo what process, which is a reaction with water?
hydrolysis

Evolution occurs because of changes in what over time?
alleles

When does coal release most of its energy?
when burning

What was once believed to be the smallest of all particles, as dalton's theory proposed?
atom

The actinides are all what type of elements?
radioactive

What type of feeders are sea lilies and feather stars?
suspension feeders

What are the proteins called that speed up biochemical reactions in cells?
enzymes

What isotope of carbon is typically used to date ancient items?
carbon 14

What two planets is the asteroid belt found between?
mars and jupiter

When wood is burned what kind of energy allows the wood to burn?
chemical

The cubic crystal system is composed of how many different types of unit cells?
three

In which solution is the amount of dissolved material equal both inside and outside of the cell?
isotonic

What element is the most common element in the universe?
hydrogen

What is the term for anything that has mass and volume?
matter

What is in danger of happening when thick magma is formed?
explosive eruptions

The important equation pv = nrt holds true for substances in what state of matter?
gas

The measurement of the extent of something along its greatest dimension is its what?
length

What force explains why objects may float in water?
buoyant force

Which organelle is made up of 5 to eight cup shaped, membrane covered stacks of discs known as cisternae?
golgi apparatus

How many bones does the  mammalian middle ear have?
three

What can echinoderms sense with their simple eyes?
light

What do we call water that has been used for cleaning, washing, flushing, or manufacturing?
wastewater

What is the name for an area that is covered in water, or at least has soggy soil, during all or part of the year?
a wetland

Regulation of the reproductive system is a process that requires the action of hormones from which gland?
pituitary gland

What occurs when organisms acquire and pass on new traits from one generation to the next generation?
evolution

What process provides more than 99% of energy?
photosynthesis

What tissue blocks entry of pathogens in mammals?
epithelial

What in the axils of leaves and stems give rise to branches?
axillary buds

The existence of what tiny, fundamental particles of matter was first proposed in the 1960s?
quarks

Animals that defend their area are generally known as what kinds of animals?
territorial

A boiler converts the chemical energy stored in fuel into what type of energy?
thermal energy

What are the ice crystals that form on the ground called?
frost

What is the largest organelle in a eukaryotic cell?
nucleus

What does the kinetic-molecular theory describe the behavior of?
an ideal gas

What kind of hormones are released into the environment for communication between animals of the same species?
pheromones

What organ contributes about 60% of the volume of semen ?
seminal vesicles

Eukaryotic cells contain what type of structures that possess special functions?
organelles

What is the common name for the midpoint between high and low tide?
sea level

What is formed when humid air near the ground cools below its dew point?
fog

When are peptide bonds between amino acids formed?
process of translation

Within the petals are two whorls of fertile floral organs that produce what?
spores

Increasing or decreasing the temperature of a system in what state acts as a stress to the system?
equilibrium

The scientific name of an organism consists of its genus and what else?
species

What type of organism was the only able to live in the anoxic atmosphere of the first 2 billion years?
anaerobic

Scientists utilize what natural process to teach cranes born in captivity to migrate along safe routes?
imprinting

What are mass, volume, and length an example of?
extensive properties

Chelicerata are know for their first pair of appendages, also know as what?
chelicerae

What kind of reproduction generates new individuals without fusion of an egg and sperm?
asexual

The properties of liquids are intermediate between those of gases and solids but are more similar to?
solids

What does blood pickup from the lungs to be carried throughout the rest of the body?
oxygen

The earliest types of what lacked flowers, leaves, roots and stems?
plants

The nervous system is made up of these?
neurons

What are regular changes in biology or behavior that occur in a 24 hour cycle?
circadian rhythm

Did darwin believe in punctuated equilibrium or gradualism?
gradualism

What is the term for a solution that resists dramatic changes in ph?
buffer

Wood consists of mainly what kind of walls?
secondary

Viruses lack metabolic enzymes and equipment for making what?
proteins

What are non-steroid hormones made of?
amino acids

The german physicist max planck (1858–1947) used the idea that atoms and molecules in a body act like oscillators to absorb and emit this?
radiation

The process of microscope mountains and valleys on the surface of a material interacting with another material is called?
friction

What do you call any device that makes work easier by changing a force?
machine

In what organ is food remains turned into solid waste for excretion?
large intestine

What is the type of cancer where bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells?
leukemia

What cells are typically characterized by the polarized distribution of organelles and membrane-bound proteins between their basal and apical surfaces?
epithelial cells

Condensation, melting, deposition, sublimation, vaporization, and freezing are all considered changes in what?
state

Myopia and hyperopia are defects that can be corrected with devices?
lenses

What do you call the part of the skeletal system that connects bones?
joints

What type of molecules sit within a membrane and contain an aqueous channel that spans the membrane’s hydrophobic region?
channel

What state of matter has a definite volume, but takes the shape of the container?
liquid

Where does the earth gets its energy from?
sun

In chemical reactions, what substances can act like metals or nonmetals, depending on their number of electrons?
metalloids

In the lungs, air is diverted into smaller and smaller passages called what?
bronchi

How did a vascular let plants grow?
they could grow taller

When a soluble compound dissolves, its constituent atoms, molecules, or ions disperse throughout what?
solvent

Many viral diseases can be prevented by giving people what?
vaccines

What purpose does the appendix serve in humans today?
none

What is the bulb called in the frontal lobe that processes smells?
olfactory bulb

According to early accounts, newton was inspired to make the connection between falling bodies and astronomical motions when he saw an apple fall from a tree and realized that if the gravitational force could extend above the ground to a tree, it might also reach this?
sun

Gravitational force on a large scale dominates interactions between large objects because it is always what?
attractive

What two microorganisms have different membrane lipids?
archaea and bacteria

Sharing a phylum with insects, spiders, daddy-long-legs, scorpions, and ticks belong to what class?
arachnids

What describes the amount of solute in a solution?
tonicity

What is the layer above the mesophere called?
stratosphere

The fundamental unit of time, the second, is based on what type of clock?
atomic clock

In a carbon triple bond, how many pairs of electrons are shared?
three

What is the reproductive part of the plant?
the flower

The attraction of an atom for the electrons of a covalent bond is its what?
electronegativity

What substance do the leaves of plants take in from the environment?
carbon dioxide

Controlled variables are kept what to prevent them from influencing the effects of the independent variable on the dependent variable?
constant

What branch of biology uses fossils to study life’s history?
paleontology

What occurs after gametes fuse and form a diploid zygote?
meiosis

What is a trait whose allele is found on a sex chromosome called?
sex-linked trait

What is required when electrons are removed from an atom, and released from the process when an electron is added?
energy

What do you call the angle of the earth's axis of rotation?
axial tilt

What kind of structure do purines have?
double ring structure

Photoautotrophs use what energy source to self-manufacture their own food?
light

What is the process of getting oxygen into the body & releasing carbon dioxide called?
respiration

What are plants that grow where people don't want them to and can take up space and use resources which hinders growth of more desirable plants?
weeds

Unlike ammonia, oxygen cannot be liquefied at room temperature because its what is below room temperature?
critical temperature

What occurs at joints?
body movements

What is the term for a symbiotic relationship in which the parasite benefits while the host is harmed?
parasitism

Alpha particles, beta particles, and gamma particles are major types of what?
radioactivity

What do obligate aerobes need to live?
oxygen

What is the standard measurement for mass?
grams

What do you call the state in which a plant slows down cellular activities and may shed its leaves?
dormancy

Is the rate of population growth increasing or decreasing?
increasing

What does the human protein cytokine help fight?
infections

What is the goal of science?
increase knowledge

What is the temperature where molecular motion stops?
absolute zero

Early blastomeres can form what if isolated?
a complete embryo

What component of an organism, made up of many cells, in turn makes up an organ?
tissues

What form do alkali metals take at room temperature?
solid

What is the cutting and burning trees to clear land for farming called?
slash-and-burn agriculture

What is the name of the scientist who named neutrinos?
enrico fermi

What creates a new seafloor at the mid-ocean ridge?
magma

What are hydrocarbons that contain only single bonds between carbon atoms called?
saturated hydrocarbons

The presence of what makes soil hold together more tightly and enables it to hold more water?
clay

What kind of anatomical structure consists of several types of tissues that together carry out particular functions?
organ

How many pathways do plants have for carbon fixation?
three

What is used to measure electric current?
galvanometer

What connects the fetus to the placenta?
umbilical cord

When your body digests food, it breaks down the molecules of nutrients and releases what?
energy

The first period of the paleozoic era was called what?
cambrian

What is a molecule with two fatty acids and a modified phosphate group attached to a glycerol backbone?
phospholipid

Some women experience cramping and pain before and during what monthly cycle?
menstruation

What is the attraction of oppositely charged ions caused by electron transfer called?
ionic bond

What process converts the sun's hydrogen nuclei into helium?
nuclear fusion

Both solids and liquids hold a definite what?
volume

Because the fields that make up an electromagnetic wave are at right angles to each other and to the direction that the wave travels, an electromagnetic wave is considered what?
transverse wave

Which measure indicates the number of electrons in a given sublevel?
superscripts

Because force and electric field are what, they have direction as well as their value?
vectors

Acceleration is a vector, and thus has a both a magnitude and what else?
direction

What is it called when individual organisms work together with one another?
cooperation

How thick is the earth's continental crust, on average?
35 kilometers

Which organ has a thick mucus lining that protects the underlying tissue from the action of the digestive juices?
stomach

What historical event taught people that soil could be lost by plowing and growing crops and encouraged new methods to prevent erosion?
the dust bowl

In what phase is the moon brightly illuminated?
full moon

What do vectors possess that scalars do not?
magnitude and direction

What are the food making factories of plants?
leaves

What does a pollinator pick from its body and carry directly to another plant of the same species?
pollen

Melting ice cubes and freezing water are examples of change of what?
state

What is the term for heterotrophs that eat only or mainly animals?
carnivores

How much work is done when a force is applied in a different direction than the direction of movement?
none

The mercury or alcohol in a common glass what changes its volume as the temperature changes?
thermometer

What are commonly used to control insect pests, but can have harmful effects on the environment?
insecticides

The components of what keep their own identity when they combine and can usually be easily separated?
mixture

What type of light can mosquitoes see?
infared

What subject is a way of learning about the natural world that is based on evidence and logic?
science

Chloroplasts are present only in cells of eukaryotes capable of what process?
photosynthesis

Shielding should be used when receiving x-rays to limit exposure to what potentially harmful form of energy?
radiation

What is the way animals act either alone or with other animals called?
animal behavior

What three primary colors of light can be distinguished by the human eye?
red, green, blue

Which body system releases hormones that act on target cells to regulate development, growth, energy metabolism, reproduction, and many behaviors?
endocrine system

What is the main difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells?
eukaryotic cells have a nucleus

What forms when cells start to grow out of control?
tumor

Organs, vessels, and lymph make up what system?
lymphatic

Like the marketplace, the metabolic economy is regulated by what basic principle?
supply and demand

As roots grow longer they will always do what?
grow downward

Which virus causes cold sores?
herpes virus

Duplicated chromosomes are composed of two sister what?
chromatids

What is the name of anything that has mass and takes up space?
matter

The units of time, day and year are based on what?
motions of earth

What is the term for an amount of force pushing against a given area?
pressure

What is the region called where an electron is most likely to be found?
the orbital

Many glasses eventually crystallize, rendering them brittle and this?
opaque

What is magnetism produced by an electrical current?
electromagnetism

A weak and temporary dipole that influences nearby atoms through electrostatic attraction and repulsion is known as what?
an instantaneous dipole

The motion of molecules in a gas is random in magnitude and direction for individual molecules, but a gas of many molecules has a predictable distribution of what, which is called the maxwell-boltzmann distribution?
molecular speeds

What helps the cell continually renew itself?
lysosomes

One of the fundamental laws of chemistry deals with the fact that we cannot create or destroy what?
matter

What are the tiny, tube-shaped structures found inside a kidney called?
nephrons

How many sperm does it take to fertilize an egg?
one

What type of climate is found mostly near the equator?
warm tropical

Metabolism is the collection of what that occur in an organism?
chemical reactions

What is the arrangement of a t-tubule with the membranes of sr on either side called?
triad

What is the name of the order that salamanders belong to?
urodela

What is the tough tissue that contains collagen?
cartilage

What common ailment is typically caused by tense muscles in the shoulders, head and neck?
headache

How many watts equals a horse power?
745

Some microorganisms can digest cellulose, breaking it down into what?
glucose monomers

Where does most geological activity take place?
plate boundaries

What can be used to mechanically separate the two elements by attracting the iron filings out of the mixture and leaving the sulfur behind?
magnet

What forms when a solute dissolves in a solvent?
solution

The enteric nervous system provides intrinsic innervation, and the autonomic nervous system provides this?
extrinsic innervation

Virtually all aquatic organisms depend directly or indirectly on what for food?
protists

Saltwater is a homogeneous mixture, another term for what?
solution

What connects the two hemispheres of the brain?
corpus callosum

Cells like a prokaryotic cell, a eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes, but a eukaryotic cell is typically larger than a prokaryotic cell, has a true nucleus (meaning its dna is surrounded by a membrane), and has other membrane-bound organelles that allow for what?
compartmentalization of functions

Colonial organisms were probably one of the first evolutionary steps towards which type of organisms?
multicellular

What do you call accumulation of excess water in the tissues?
edema

Transport epithelia that function in maintaining water balance also often function in disposal of what?
metabolic wastes

What is magnetism produced by electricity called?
electromagnetism

What is an area that is saturated with water or covered by water for at least one season of the year?
a wetland

How are bacteria identified and classified?
by their shape

What do we call forces that act on the system from outside?
external

Prostaglandins also help regulate the aggregation of platelets, one step in the formation of what?
blood clots

Deceleration is the opposite of what?
acceleration

Each cell and every living thing requires what?
energy

In the human body, what do you call the intersection where the paths for air and food cross.?
pharynx

Air conditioning systems can incubate certain bacteria and what else?
mold

The toothlessness of modern birds, which serves to trim the weight of the head, is an example of what?
adaptation

What are the active transport mechanisms by which molecules enter and leave the cell inside vesicles?
endocytosis and exocytosis

Fractures, rickets, and osteoarthritis all affect what part(s) of the body?
bones

Name the closest living relatives of tetrapods?
lungfishes

What type of air may get stuck on the windward side of a mountain range?
maritime air

Most protists are aquatic organisms and need what kind of environment to survive?
moist

The help with diffusion comes from special proteins in the membrane known as what?
transport proteins

The extracellular matrix of most animal cells contains abundant amounts of what protein, which helps hold things together?
collagen

What are two types of lobe finned fish?
coelacanths and lungfish

What is the rate of change of velocity called?
acceleration

What is the main organ required for respiration in mammals?
the lungs

Molecules are represented by symbols that all who agree on?
chemists

What is the smallest unit of time commonly based on?
second

Atoms cannot be subdivided, created, or what?
destroyed

What process changes a liquid to a gas without boiling?
evaporation

Every peripheral nerve is connected directly or indirectly to what?
the spinal cord

The four phases of mitosis are prophase, metaphase, anaphase and what?
telophase

Pathogenic prokaryotes usually cause illness by producing what?
poisons

Once cells _______, they can no longer divide
differentiate

Phase labels - and even special conditions - are sometimes included for the substances that are part of what?
chemical equations

Body waves travel through the earth and arrive at seismograms before what?
surface waves

What are the outpocketings of the digestive tract that remove nitrogenous wastes and function in osmoregulation?
malpighian tubules

What were the first photosynthetic organisms on earth?
bacteria

What do you call the substance in a cooling system that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states?
refrigerant

Certain characteristics are frequently inherited together because of what?
linkage

Which organ protects the body from injury, water loss, and microorganisms?
skin

What is the term for the sudden movement of large blocks of rock and soil down a slope?
slump

What is the comparison of two factors within a population?
correlation

What process is the opposite of nitrogen fixation?
denitrification

Plant-like protists produce oxygen through which process?
photosynthesis

Insulin is produced by what part of the body?
pancreas

What color is the brittle metalloid tallurium?
silvery white

What compounds, which serve as fuels and are used in manufacturing, are called the driving force of western civilization?
hydrocarbons

What is the main type of organism that gets its energy directly from the sun?
plants

What are the two factors that affect the pressure of fluids?
depth and density

What consists of four major components: inorganic mineral matter, organic matter, water and air, and living matter?
soil

What is the term for the movement of substances due to random thermal molecular motion?
diffusion

Most metals exist in which form at room temperature?
solids

A stem cell is an unspecialized cell that can divide without limit as needed and can, under specific conditions, differentiate into these?
specialized cells

What monthy cycle causes changes in the ovaries and uterus?
the menstrual cycle

Chytridiomycota are considered the most primitive of what kingdom?
fungi

What is a soft, gray, nontoxic alkaline earth metal?
calcium

In many polychaetes, the parapodia are richly supplied with blood vessels and also function as what?
gills

What is formed when plant bodies are lithified?
coal

What is the term for the direct manipulation of genes for practical purposes?
genetic engineering

When both momentum and kinetic energy are conserved in a closed system, the collision is called what?
an elastic collision

What are the two groups of therian mammals?
placental mammals and marsupials

What is the name of the spacecraft that has performed the closest flyby of uranus?
voyager 2

What is the group of all the eukaryotes that are not fungi, animals, or plants called?
protists

What have a symbiotic relationship between a fungus and a photosynthetic organism?
lichens

Define motion.
change of position

Most tissues regulated by the autonomic nervous system receive both sympathetic and parasympathetic input from?
postganglionic neurons

What is responsible for the development of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria?
bacterial mutations

Many cancers, as well as autism, are thought to have what component, which is certainly a factor in asthma?
environmental

The first plants probably evolved from what?
aquatic green algae

What is the unit of liquid measurement in the metric system?
liter

Wavelength and frequency are defined in the same way for electromagnetic waves as they are for which other waves?
mechanical

What covers the body of a fish to help the move their body to swim?
scales

What type of bond forms by unpaired electrons from two atoms "matching up"?
covalent bond

When gas pressure-forces are used to move an object the work is done on the object by?
expanding gas

A lymphocyte is the type of which cell involved in an immune system response?
white blood cell

Most fossils form when a dead organism is buried in what?
sediment

What do you call an object that attracts certain materials such as iron?
magnet

Coral and the algae living inside of them have what type of relationship, since the algae relies on the coral to stay close to the water's surface?
symbiotic

Because opposite charges attract, oppositely charged ions attract each other to form what?
ionic bonds

A major source of primary pollutants is the burning of oil and coal, which are types of what?
fossil fuels

What causes natural ripening in fruit?
ethylene

In species with sexual reproduction, each cell of the body has two copies of each what?
chromosome

On what part of bones would you expect to find cartilage?
end

Who invented the taxonomic classification system?
carl linnaeus

What type of pathogen is responsible for african sleeping sickness?
trypanosoma

How many underlying principles does the science of biology have?
four

What are biochemical compounds, such as fats and oils, that consist of fatty acids and store energy?
lipids

The temperature at which all molecular motion has ceased is called what?
absolute zero

What term means controlling body temperature within a narrow range from the inside through biochemical or physical means?
endothermy

The most important characteristic of extant amphibians is a moist, permeable skin used for this?
cutaneous respiration

Fertilized mollusk eggs develop into what?
larvae

Proper kidney function is essential for homeostasis of what level, which in turn helps ensure the functioning of enzymes?
ph

Proteins include 20 common types of what compounds?
amino acids

Isotopes have different number of these in their nuclei?
neutrons

What can destroy living cells, produce mutations and cause cancer?
gamma rays

What type of feeders are sponges?
filter feeders

The first consumption of breast milk or formula floods the baby's gastrointestinal tract with what?
beneficial bacteria

Weight refers to what force acting on a mass?
gravitational

Being exposed to sunlight will produce what vitamin in the skin?
vitamin d

Modern plants reflect what kind of changes that have occurred over many, many years?
evolutionary changes

What device measures current that flows through wire?
ammeter

In science, what is defined as a change in position?
motion

What makes up the core of the endoskeleton?
vertebral column

The bottom of the ocean is called what?
the benthic zone

Made of hot, solid rock, the mantle is beneath what layer of the earth?
crust

What happens to the volume of the gas when temperature increases but amount of gas and its pressure are constant?
volume increases

Meiosis, like mitosis, is preceded by the duplication of what?
chromosomes

The invention of what instrument in the 1930s allowed scientists to see viruses for the first time?
electron microscope

What is the name of the chart that allows you to easily determine the expected percentage of different genotypes in the offspring of two parents?
punnett square

What is the functional unit of compact bone?
osteon

Because the nuclei of each h atom contain protons, the electrons in the bond are attracted to the nuclei (opposite charges attract). but because the two atoms involved in the covalent bond are both h atoms, each nucleus attracts the electrons by the same amount. thus the electron pair is equally shared by these?
two atoms

What is the term for when the phenotype of offspring is partly determined by the phenotype of its mother, irrespective of genotype?
maternal effect

Natural methods of asexual reproduction, such as cuttings or budding, include strategies that plants have developed to perform what?
self-propagation

Many metals react with acids to produce what gas?
hydrogen

What is the process of a cell membrane surrounding a particle and engulfing it calles?
phagocytosis

What type of rocks are very useful for determining the deformation history of an area?
sedimentary

What is the term for dating a rock based on composition decay?
radioactive dating

What is the term for a  very rapid motor response that is not directed by the brain?
reflex

Crossover occurs between non-sister chromatids of which chromosomes?
homologous

Water is an oxide of what element?
hydrogen

What term is used to describe the parts of the brain involved in the reception and interpretation of sensory stimuli collectively?
sensorium

Experiments show that each o2 molecule has two unpaired what?
electrons

Acidity is measured by what physical property?
ph

Antacids are bases that neutralize what in the digestive tract?
acids

What is the climate of a small area called?
microclimate

The rate of what process depends on how many of an organism’s genes have changed over a period of time and on the generation time of a particular species?
evolution

The sticky stigma at the tip of the carpel receives what?
pollen

Are the joints between the vertebrae contained in your backbone fully movable, partially movable, or unmovable?
partially movable

Which branch of biology uses fossils to study life's history?
paleontology

What do you call prokaryotes that do not need oxygen for respiration?
anaerobic

When a glacier no longer moves, what is it called?
an ice sheet

What did roots evolve from that plants used for aborption?
rhizoids

Although lots of symbiotic relationships help both organisms, sometimes one of the organisms is harmed. when that happens, the organism that benefits, and is not harmed, is called a what?
parasite

What are named for major physical or climatic features and for their predominant vegetation?
terrestrial biomes

Similarity of crystal structures is used to categorize what non-living materials?
minerals

Diabetes is a non-infectious disease in which the body is unable to control the amount of what in the blood?
sugar

All living organisms are classified into one of six broad categories called what?
kingdoms

What is the most common type of cancer in adult males?
prostate cancer

What occurs when an unstable nucleus emits an alpha particle and energy?
alpha decay

What molecule can be used by the body to synthesize cholesterol ?
acetyl coa

Full siblings share how many genes with each other?
half

Which highly valuable substance found in jewelry has a density of about 19 g/cm^3?
gold

Sperm propel themselves through secretions in the uterus and enter what tube?
fallopian

What type of minerals are often found where seas once covered the land?
carbonate

How many amino acids generally consist in protien?
100 or more

Rain, snow, sleet, and hail are all examples of what?
precipitation

Where would you find most pollution of ocean water?
coastline

Water can be a solid, liquid, and what other form?
gas

What happens to a species when all of the individuals die out or evolve into a different species?
extinction

The viscosity of a liquid is a measure of what?
resistance to flow

How is energy expressed when it is released in a chemical reaction?
as negative number

What is the term for a structure within the cytoplasm that performs a specific job in the cell?
organelle

What part of a mature plant cell is responsible for storing substances like water, enzymes, and salts?
central vacuole

Whereas each cell shares the same genome and dna sequence, each cell does not turn on, or express, the same set of what?
genes

In biology, what is required for ecosystems to survive?
energy

Because glucose is a major cellular fuel, starch represents a supply of what?
energy

Seed plants that produce seeds in the ovaries of their flowers are known as what?
angiosperms

Which blood vessels is oxygen transferred through?
capillaries

What small biological structures make up all living things, including the human body?
cells

How does carbon dioxide chemically weather rocks?
by creating acids

What is the interaction of waves with other waves called?
wave interference

What kinds of rocks can change and become new types of rocks?
any types of rocks

What type of earthquake has a shallow focus because the plates meet near the surface?
transform fault

What causes waves to bring sand up onto the beach during summers?
low energy

What kind of bases completely dissociate in water, releasing all hydroxide anions into the solution?
strong

What model of the atom features an electron orbiting a nucleus, forming a closed-current loop and producing a magnetic field with a north pole and a south pole?.
planetary model

Nearly all apicomplexans are parasites of what?
animals

What is the term for sheets of cells that form a boundary between a mass of cells and a cavity or space?
epithelia

What does a cell need to transform into a cancerous cell?
mutations

Circular water waves decrease in what property as they move away from where a rock is dropped?
amplitude

What property of certain states of matter can be given in units of millimeters of mercury?
pressure

Loss of energy is the reason that what typically has few levels?
food chain

Root-like projections anchor adults of what colony-dwelling animals to solid surfaces such as rocks and reefs?
sponges

We divide up the earth's seas into five what, which are really all interconnected?
oceans

Regulated by guard cells, stomata allow what to enter and exit the plant?
gases

The rising and sinking of these can cause precipitation?
global air currents

Where does evidence that magnetic reversals occur come from?
rocks on ocean floor

What is used to measure air pressure?
barometer

As altitude rises, what happens to the temperature in the thermosphere?
temperature increases

How many stomach compartments do ruminants have?
four

Seismic waves show that the inner core of the earth is solid while the outer core is what?
liquid

What do ions of the same charge do?
repel each other

Integral proteins penetrate the hydrophobic interior of the what?
lipid bilayer

The thermal properties of what substance largely contribute to the temperature climate of europe?
water

Our sun is on the main sequence, like most stars, and it is classified by what colorful name?
yellow dwarf

Stirring, surface area, and temperature affect the rate at which what occurs?
solute dissolves

What process of gradual change is the source of diversity of life on earth?
evolution

Shivering helps the body return to a stable what?
temperature

What term is used to describe a solution in which water is the solvent?
aqueous solution

What is prosopagnosia?
face blindness

Fungi are unique in having cell walls made of what?
chitin

What is the largest body in the solar system?
sun

Which part of an earthquake is in the ground where the ground breaks?
the focus

What substances contained in lemons, vinegar, and sour candies have a sour taste?
acids

Many microorganisms are single celled and use what for perception and movement?
organelles

Because it produces oxygen, what plant process was necessary for the evolution of animals?
photosynthesis

What category of animals in the vertebrate group has a relatively small brain but highly developed sense organs?
fish

What distinguishing feature predates the branching of mammals from other vertebrates?
backbone

The simplest way to define a base is which kind of compound that produces hydroxide ions when dissolved in water?
ionic

What is the term for behaviors that are closely controlled by genes with little or no environmental influence?
innate behaviors

In the forward reaction, hydrogen and iodine combine to form what?
hydrogen iodide

Catalysts can greatly increase the rates of chemical what?
reactions

Ecology, botany, and zoology are what type of science?
life science

How do we describe chemical reactions?
chemical equations

Represented in equations by the letter "g", what pulls objects down to the earth's surface?
gravity

The similarity in biochemical compounds between living things provides evidence for the evolution of species from what?
common ancestors

The only invertebrates than can fly belong to what broad group, which is highly successful?
insects

The dna is wound around proteins called what?
histones

What part of an animal helps to prevent water loss and gives support and protection?
exoskeleton

Protozoa are generally difficult to identify due to what?
their varied shape

Where does digestion begin?
gastrovascular cavity

What basic units are neither created nor destroyed during a chemical change, but are instead rearranged?
atoms

Which members of the food chain break down remains of plants and other organisms when they die?
decomposers

Concentration is the removal of solvent, which increases the concentration of what?
solute

What type of coal deposits are the most extensive ever formed?
carboniferous

What is the term for the skeletal structure of the head that supports the face and protects the brain?
cranium (skull)

What is it called when organisms with traits that better enable them to adapt to their environment tend to survive and reproduce in greater numbers?
natural selection

A crow that becomes used to a scarecrow and lands on it is an example of what?
habituation

What term is used to describe the sequence of elementary steps that together comprise an entire chemical reaction?
reaction mechanism

Structurally, diplomonads have two equal-sized what and multiple flagella?
nuclei

What is the term for the affected factor in an experiment?
dependent variable

Furthermore, most of the proteins within membranes have both hydrophobic and which other regions?
hydrophilic

What are proteins that increase the rate of biochemical reactions?
enzymes

What process enables all living things to maintain a constant internal environment?
homeostasis

Which hormone is secreted by the pancreas in a human body?
insulin

What are the gas giants mostly made of .
hydrogen and helium

Static friction acts on objects when they are resting on what?
a surface

The ammonium ion is what type of acid?
brønsted-lowry

Loss of muscle mass due to breakdown of structural proteins is known as what?
atrophy

Which of these is last if ordered in increasing size: galaxy, solar system, star cluster?
galaxy

What encloses the genetic material of the virus?
the capsid

Plant-like protists are called what?
algae

How do mammals ventilate their lungs?
negative pressure breathing

Blood vessels blood pumped by the heart flows through a series of vessels known as arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins before returning to this?
heart

What do you call the fragments of cells involved in the clotting process that are suspended in blood plasma?
platelets

What year did the soho spacecraft first started to operate?
1996

Concentration of what, the substance left behind when ocean water evaporates, is about 3.5 percent?
salts

What has a distinct front and back end?
volvox sphere

In how many basic was can substances cross the plasma membrane?
two

What type of cells have chloroplasts?
plant cells

What is the term for disease-causing agents, such as bacteria and viruses?
pathogens

To figure out the height of a wave you measure the distance between the crest and what?
trough

Humans possess greater diversity of what type, compared to laboratory animals?
genetics

What system can be used by scientists to express very small numbers?
scientific notation

An unknown genotype can be determined by observing what, the term for characteristics of the resulting offspring?
phenotypes

Wind power, solar power, hydropower, and geothermal power are called renewable sources of energy or what other term?
alternative energy

How much electricity is generated by an average car battery?
twelve volts

What is the term for a cellular "scaffolding" that crisscrosses the cytoplasm?
cytoskeleton

What common code do all known living organisms use?
genetic

What are 2 common growth patterns of population?
exponential and logistic

Solutions to schrödinger’s equation involve four special numbers called what?
quantum numbers

What is the only human cell with flagella?
sperm

What can be described as a tiny male gametophyte enclosed in a tough capsule?
grain of pollen

What is the largest artery in the body called?
aorta

Fertilization occurs if a sperm enters the egg while it is passing through what tube?
fallopian

When the smooth muscle relaxes, the arterioles dilate, allowing blood to enter the what?
capillaries

What to tadpoles develop into?
frogs

What part of the body do fish use to absorb oxygen?
gills

The electrons in a water molecule are more concentrated around the more highly charged oxygen nucleus than around this?
hydrogen nuclei

What is the layer of ground below the surface that is always frozen, even in the summer?
permafrost

What is usually the prey of a protist?
bacteria

What concentrates wave energy or disperses it?
wave refraction

In plants and algae, photosynthesis takes place in which organelles?
chloroplasts

What produces sound waves that travel outward in all directions in water?
echo sounders

The roots of a plant take in nutrients and what vital substance?
water

Carbon fixation is the first step of what cycle involving light reactions?
calvin cycle

What are the attractive forces that occur between polar molecules called?
dipole-dipole forces

The production of multiple copies of a single gene is called?
gene cloning

Fossil fuels are made out of what two objects?
plants and animals

Amoebas and paramecia are examples of what?
protozoa

Name the bacteria that make food through photosynthesis and release oxygen into the air?
cyanobacteria

What simple machine consists of a bar that rotates around a fixed point called the fulcrum?
lever

Which carbohydrate is produced by photosynthesis?
glucose

What term is used to describe the line of latitude right in the middle of the planet?
equator

What is the opening formed between adjacent vertebrae for the exit of a spinal nerve called?
intervertebral foramen

What two planets is the asteroid belt found between?
mars and jupiter

Neon is an example of what kind of gas?
noble

Many organisms look very similar to other organisms because they may be from the same what?
species

What type of compound is hydrogen chloride?
covalent

What kind of volcanic eruptions are less deadly?
non-explosive

Where do most ecosystems get their energy from?
sun

When a solute dissolves into a solvent what is that called?
enthalpy

The smallest part of an element that maintains the identity of that element is called what?
atom

Varves form in lakes covered by what?
ice

Speed takes distance and what else into account?
time

Which division of the autonomic nervous system controls processes like digestion, heartbeat, and breathing?
parasympathetic

What does the ovule develop into after fertilization?
seed

What is a key factor in the growth of populations?
immigration

Air is said to reach what point, a term used by meteorologists, when humidity increases or temperature decreases?
its dew point

In neurons, what often involves gated sodium channels?
depolarization

Line graphs are especially useful for showing changes over what?
time

After a massive eruption what will a mountain collapsing above an empty chamber create?
caldera

The posterior half of the foot is formed by seven tarsal bones. the most superior of these bones is called?
talus

What helps to regulate consciousness, arousal, and sleep states?
thalamus

Some fish will be over-fished to the point that their species ceases to exist, which is also known as what?
extinction

Not surprisingly, what is the function of the most developed part of a bird's brain?
controlling flight

What type of roots enable a plant to grow on another plant?
epiphytic

What is the distance north or south of the equator called?
latitude

In response to a cut, mast cells secrete histamines that cause nearby capillaries to do what?
dilate

What is the term for an ionic compound that produces positive hydrogen ions when dissolved in water?
acid

The stems of all vascular plants get longer through primary growth. this occurs in primary meristem at the tips and ______ of the stems.
nodes

What kind of waves are electromagnetic waves?
transverse

What process is involved in the formation of a waterfall, when a stream flows from an area of harder to softer rock?
erosion

Meissner’s corpuscles are not as plentiful in the palms as they are in the what other part of the hand?
fingertips

What are the two types of earth crust?
oceanic and continental

What is determined by the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave?
wave amplitude

What is made from the minerals in rocks known as bauxite?
aluminum

What is a defining feature of deformed sedimentary rocks?
not horizontal

Resemblance to other species can serve as protection to what category of species?
prey

What type of cells make up the epidermis of a leaf?
dermal cells

What carries warm or cold water throughout the world’s oceans?
ocean currents

What type of resource cannot be replaced as easily as it is consumed?
nonrenewable

What substances are involved in most of the chemical reactions that take place in organisms, including digestion?
enzymes

What occurs when the immune system is not working properly?
immunodeficiency

The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called what?
magnetic force

What is applied to a rock to make it bend and flow?
stress

What is the function of chloroplasts that are found in plant and algal cells?
photosynthesis

What passes through the prostate gland immediately inferior to the bladder before passing below the pubic symphysis?
urethra

Terrestrial animals lose water by evaporation from their skin and which surfaces?
respiratory

What color are leukocytes blood cells?
white

What is something that all machines must overcome?
friction

The conservation of momentum principle can be applied to systems as different as a comet striking earth and a gas containing huge numbers of atoms and these?
molecules

What are the small units that comprise nucleic acids?
nucleotides

Minerals that are not pure elements are made of what?
chemical compounds

What can be classified as monoprotic or polyprotic based on the number of acidic hydrogens they contain?
acids

What is the top part of water able to receive enough sunlight for photosynthesis called?
photic zone

Different media affect what property of light?
speed

Signals from rods and cones can follow several different pathways in what structure of the eye?
retina

What is the term for getting used to something after being consistently exposed to it?
habituation

What element do nuclear power plants use in fuel rods?
uranium

Where on earth do bacteria live?
all environments

What type of waves radiate energy out from an earthquake's focus?
seismic

What is a popular treatment for kidney failure?
dialysis

What is critical for the formation of hemoglobin?
iron ions

Which hormones work together to control the level of glucose in the blood?
insulin and glucagon

What are the two basic parts that all flowering plants have in common?
blade and petiole

Salts are important in maintaining what balance of the blood?
osmotic

What do some animals grow to protect themselves in winter?
thicker fur

What weather phenomenon can raise sea level as much as 25 feet when low pressure pulls water upward?
storm surge

The action of sunlight on the skin triggers the body to produce what vitamin?
vitamin d

What is heard when sound waves bounce back from a surface that they can't pass through?
echo

What is hole that is dug or drilled through the ground down to an aquifer?
well

What protective substance covers the skin of most reptiles?
scales

What step, involving placement of a substance on the stigma, precedes fertilization?
pollination

What weather phenomenon is caused by strong warm updrafts from heated ground?
thunderstorms

The older parts of what structures anchor the plant and transport water and solutes between the soil and shoots?
roots

What do you call a specialized type of plant tissue that transports water and nutrients throughout the plant?
vascular tissue

The major fuel for the brain is which carbohydrate?
glucose

How do they classify tornadoes?
wind speed

What part of the body does hepatitis b effect?
liver

In the radiative zone, light particles called what can only travel a few millimeters before they hit another particle?
photons

What natural resource can be damaged by the accumulation of too much salt?
soil

What secures teeth in the mouth?
socket

What is the production of offspring without gamete fusion called?
asexual reproduction

What causes continents to drift closer to the poles or the equator?
plate movements

What does a hypothesis become after many experiments provide results supporting it?
a theory

Geologists group rocks based on how they what?
form

What organelle contains the genetic material of the cell?
nucleus

What kind of waves travel through liquids and solids as well as air?
sound waves

What is made by trees and other plants during photosynthesis?
oxygen

Regardless of the mode, light is modeled as traveling in straight lines called what?
rays

What are organisms called, like the red-winged blackbird, that eat many different types of food?
generalists

What is a common name for the descriptive hypothesis that help to understand patterns of descent?
evolutionary trees

Exemplified by a lit match bursting into flame or the process that forms fossil fuels, chemical reactions vary greatly in terms of what?
speed

What is the best room in the home to start saving water?
the bathroom

Latitude affects the amount of which radiation a place receives?
solar

What physical property of matter reflects how closely packed the particles are?
density

What is the force of attraction between fundamental particles called quarks, called.
strong nuclear force

The force that pulls objects toward the earth is what?
gravity

What is the distance something travels in a given amount of time called?
speed

One type of tissue, called brown fat, is made up of cells packed full of what?
mitochondria

Abnormal electrical activity in the brain is the cause of what disease associated with seizures?
epilepsy

Because atoms are always electrically neutral, for each added proton, one of what is also added?
electron

What is the group of single-celled organisms lacking a nucleus that have a single piece of circular dna in the nucleoid area of the cell?
prokaryotes

What are  electromagnetic waves created by?
oscillating charges

What is the first stage of cellular respiration?
glycolysis

Red algae and green algae are the closest relatives of what?
land plants

The axial skeleton forms the vertical, central axis of the body and includes all bones of the head, neck, chest, and back. it serves to protect the brain, spinal cord, heart, and what else?
lungs

What is an object that orbits a larger object called?
satellite

When atoms gain or lose electrons, what is formed?
ions

Lymph capillaries collect the fluid that leaks from blood capillaries and slowly return it to what system?
cardiovascular

Asthma affects what tiny branches into which the bronchi are divided?
bronchioles

The difference between aldehydes and ketones is the placement of what group within the molecule?
carbonyl

A plane mirror has a flat reflective surface and forms only which kind of images?
virtual

Dissolved fertilizer can ultimately lead to the creation of what in lakes or coastal oceans, which means a place where nothing can live?
dead zone

When the hydrogen is nearly used up, the star can fuse which element into heavier elements?
helium

What type of cell has negative anode is positive cathode?
voltaic cell

Which human body system controls the amount of water in the body and removes wastes?
urinary system

Rounded grains indicate that the minerals eroded from what?
earlier rock

Changes of state of matter do not involve what type of reaction?
chemical reaction

What type of mining is used to recover ores that are deeper into earth’s surface?
underground

What are liverworts with a flattened, ribbon-like body called?
thallose liverworts

What is made up of organisms of the same species that live in the same area?
population

The oxygen atom in a water molecule pull the electrons away from the hydrogen atoms which leads to an unequal distribution of what?
charge

Are zeroes that show only where the decimal point fall significant or not significant?
not significant

Torpor, a process that leads to a decrease in activity and metabolism and allows animals to survive adverse conditions, includes what long winter 'sleep'?
hibernation

What produces gametes with different alleles?
heterozygotes

What term is used to describe structures that are similar in unrelated organisms?
analogous

What is defined as a saturated layer of rock or soil?
aquifer

Air flows into the lungs largely due to a difference in what?
pressure

The cytoplasm divides during what stage of the cell cycle?
cytokinesis

Researchers have also used insect courtship to explore genetic variation underlying differences in what?
behavior

What part of the brain lies under the cerebrum and behind the brain stem?
cerebellum

In human females, the mammary glands are associated with, but not part of, what organ system that is used to create new humans?
reproductive

What is the term for volcanic mudflows?
lahars

During the scientific revolution, who proposed that the sun, not earth, is the center of the solar system?
copernicus

Quantum chromodynamics combines what property with quark theory?
color

Traits inherited in mendelian patterns are either?
dominant or recessive

What kind of reproduction results in offspring that are genetically unique?
sexual reproduction

How many vertebrae make up the human vertebral column?
33

What do cells of dermal tissue secrete?
cuticle

What is the term for many different types of animals within the same species?
diversity

What is a process in which some substances change into different substances?
a chemical reaction

What causes nitrate to go back to its gaseous nitrogen state?
denitrifying bacteria

What is the metabolic process by which cells obtain energy by “burning” glucose?
cellular respiration

What weakly scatters visible light?
air

Arteries carry oxygenated blood away from the heart, what carries un-oxygenated blood back to the heart?
veins

What type of analysis is performed to study gene expression patterns in cells?
rna analysis

What class are centipedes and millipedes in?
myriapoda

Light moving from air into water is bent ___________ the normal?
more

An electrical signal along a nerve cell triggers the secretion of what?
neurotransmitter molecules

Carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus and sulfur are basic elements that form what type of compounds, which are vital to life?
organic compounds

Urea and carbon dioxide are molecules with how many carbon atoms?
one

Half of the neurons formed in the embryo are eliminated because of _____________
competition

What do omnivores eat?
plants & animals

Upwelling mantle at the mid-ocean ridge pushes plates in which direction?
outward

Why are exotic species also called invasive species?
threaten other species

The process of producing mature sperm is called what?
spermatogenesis

Unlike theories, which are proved true, what are often falsified?
hypotheses

What living things have cell walls containing cellulose and plastids such as chloroplasts?
plants

Where does the energy from an atomic bomb come from?
nucleus of atom

Removal of dams on rivers is an example of what?
restoration

What is considered the smallest unit of life?
cell

What living things are considered photoautotrophs because they use sunlight and carbon from carbon dioxide to synthesize chemical energy in the form of carbohydrates?
plants

Acids are molecular compounds that dissolve in water to produce hydronium ions and what else?
an anion

What is the terme for water vapor changing to liquid water?
condensation

What processes involve a transfer of electrons between the wire and the solution?
electrochemical

What happens when development of nervous system is disturbed?
neurodevelopmental disorders

What color is the fungus in blue cheese?
blue

Not even light can escape from what extremely dense object sometimes found in deep space?
black holes

The nucleus is comprised primarily of?
empty space

What in mammalian lungs, increases the surface area for gas exchange?
alveoli

What is the process by which some solids transition directly into gases?
sublimation

What are the two main parts of the human nervous system?
brain, spinal cord

In frequency, the larger the air column, the larger the what?
wavelength

Subducting plate and epicenter are terms related to what phenomenon?
earthquake

What is the process by which organisms break down chemicals to make food energy?
chemosynthesis

What is the term for an organism’s underlying genetic makeup, consisting of both the physically visible and the non-expressed alleles?
genotype

Which organ is a wide tube connecting the small intestine with the anus?
large intestine

What is produced when sulfur and oxygen combine?
sulfur oxides

Plant cells divide into two equal halves during what process?
mitosis

What is the type of succession that happens after the destruction of a habitat?
secondary succession

The name of a monatomic cation is simply the name of the element followed by this word?
ion

What is an extremely severe food allergy reaction?
anaphylaxis

What do you call the formation of a water vapor pocket?
cavitation

Internal body fluids link exchange surfaces to what else?
body cells

What magnetism is produced by electricity?
electromagnetism

What is a type of plant tissue consisting of undifferentiated cells that can continue to divide and differentiate?
meristem

What bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons?
covalent

What is the common abbreviation for noting the rhesus blood type?
rh

Coral reefs are a type of what large community and have the highest biodiversity on earth?
biome

What large organelle comprised of cup-shaped discs is found close to the nucleus of the cell, where it modifies proteins that have been delivered in transport vesicles?
golgi apparatus

The penis, testes and epididymes are structures in what male anatomical system?
reproductive

When waves are reflected at the same angle, what is it called?
angle of reflection

What us state leads all states in producing geothermal energy?
california

Sexual signaling molecules released by fungi are known as what?
pheromones

Which energy is momentarily stored in tendons after each leap provides a boost for the next leap?
kinetic

What is the name for a simple machine that consists of two inclined planes?
wedge

Each gamete will have one copy of each chromosome following which process involving cell division?
meiosis

Where do most skin structures originate in?
dermis

What are the primary producers in the ocean?
phytoplankton

Chemists use simple diagrams to show an atom’s valence electrons and how they do what?
transfer

Soil erosion is a natural process, but what can increase it unnaturally?
human activities

Which part of the reproductive process only contributes one set of chromosomes?
sperm

What do you call different organs working together?
organ systems

A machine is any device that makes work easier by doing what?
changing a force

When electricity is passed through solid sodium it changes into what and gives off light?
gas

What type of plant makes up nearly all plant species?
angiosperms

Prokaryotic cells have what structure outside their plasma membrane?
cell wall

The hemolymph and body cells exchange chemicals within what body part?
the sinuses

Types of compounds include covalent and which other compounds?
ionic

Animals can transport what waste material in the circulatory system and store it safely at high concentrations?
urea

What can happen if there is a blockage in circulation to the brain?
stroke

The high points of a transverse wave are called what?
crests

Besides greenland, where are the earth's largest ice sheets found?
antarctica

What kind of path does the energy of an electromagnetic wave take?
straight line

The direct conversion of a solid to a gas, without an intervening liquid phase, is called what?
sublimation

Amino acids are the building blocks of what macromolecules?
proteins

What force opposes a motion of a moving body? for example a car breaking on a road.
friction

The pain of angina means the heart muscle fibers need more what?
oxygen

Acids and bases are important in living things because what proteins typically can perform their job only at a certain level of acidity?
enzymes

Cellular respiration that proceeds in the presence of oxygen is known as what?
aerobic respiration

Electromagnetic radiation behaves like particles as well as what?
waves

Claw ends of hammers and flagpole pulleys are examples of simple machines that reverse what?
direction of force

Lipids are also know by what name?
fats

Roots, stems and leaves are organs commonly found in what?
plants

What type of cells in the body fluids and tissues of most animals specifically interact with and destroy pathogens?
immune cells

What makes breathing difficult due to respiratory system disease?
narrow air passages

What type of cell layer do flatworms have?
mesoderm

What gland is located at the base of the brain and secretes the hormone melatonin?
pineal

What are the most common roundworm parasites of people in the u. s.?
pinworms

What is the type of landscape that occurs at higher latitudes than deserts, has short grasses and low bushes, and are dry because they are in continental interiors?
steppe

The existence of (virtual) photons is possible only by virtue of the heisenberg uncertainty principle and can travel an unlimited distance, so the range ofthe electromagnetic for is what?
infinite

What is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave?
light

What changes water vapor to liquid water?
condensation

What instrument, with a digital readout, is used by scientists to measure very small masses?
electronic balance

What element is released into the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels?
sulfur

What type of hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms?
unsaturated

What is the general name for a wave that travels along the surface of a medium?
surface wave

Carbohydrates are an important group of biological molecules that includes sugars and these?
starches

What types of drugs affect the brain and influence how a person can feel, think, or act?
psychoactive

Chemical reactions always involve what?
energy

An object undergoing circular motion experiences centripetal what?
acceleration

What rocks are formed by crystallization of chemical precipitates?
chemical sedimentary

In some plants, the sporophyte is diploid, while the gametophyte is what?
haploid

A lipid is one of a highly diverse group of compounds made up mostly of what?
hydrocarbons

During mitosis what is replicated in the primary spermatocyte?
dna

What can carry nerve impulses from tissues and organs to the spinal cord and brain?
sensory neurons

Chemical equations need to be balanced to satisfy the law of what?
conservation of matter

Which species in class insecta has three body segments, six jointed legs, and multiple head appendages?
arthropod

Whether it's puppies or people, offspring and parents usually share many of what?
traits

Connected to agriculture, forestry, mining, and urbanization, what is the single biggest cause of extinction today?
habitat loss

The hexapoda subphylum includes mainly what type of animal?
insects

What are living echinoderms divided into five of?
clades

Gases on earth originated from comets and what events?
volcanic eruptions

What season is it in the southern hemisphere when it's winter in the northern?
summer

What is the name for areas where there is overlap between closely related species?
hybrid zones

By what are skeletal muscles attached to bones?
tendons

What is the best-known geyser in the world that also faithfully erupts every 90 minutes?
old faithful

What kind of energy constitutes the total kinetic energy of all the atoms that make up an object?
thermal energy

What is the name for birds that live on water like ducks?
waterfowl

Spores are generally produced through what type of reproduction?
sexual

What do we call the diffusion of water across a membrane because of a difference in concentration?
osmosis

Scientific notation expresses a number as a what, times a power of 10?
coefficient

How many valence electrons does a sodium atom have ?
one

Within an organism, the cells that give rise to the next generation are known as germ cells, while those that do not (that is, the cells that die when the organism dies) are known as what cells?
somatic

An external opening in the what of amphibians allows wastes and gametes to exit the body?
cloaca

What kind of scientists measure percentages of sand, silt, and clay?
soil scientists

What hormone affects developent and maturation in animals?
thyroid

The three types of mammals are characterized by their method of what?
reproduction

What planet has the most volcanoes?
venus

Gene duplications that are able to persist over many generations without causing too much harm to an organism or species can lead to what?
mutations

What keeps earth in orbit around the sun?
gravity

The work-energy theorem states that the net work on a system equals the change in what type of energy?
kinetic energy

Living organisms release carbon dioxide into the atmosphere by what method?
cellular respiration

Excretory organs that conserve what essential substance help terrestrial animals to avoid desiccation?
water

Venus rotates slowly in a direction opposite to the direction of what?
its orbit

What is the ph of pure water?
7

The volume of a gas is comprised of about 10% matter. what is the rest?
empty space

Heterotrophs is another name for what group?
consumers

What is dna transcribed into after being replicated?
rna

What is name of the phenomenon where similar traits evolve independently in species that do not share a common ancestry?
convergent evolution

The flow of water through the sponge is unidirectional, driven by the beating of what?
flagella

What is the process for developing knowledge called?
science

Arteries, veins, and capillaries are the three main types of what?
blood vessels

Amphibians may attract mates with what?
calls or scents

What type of bounded nucleus do protists have?
membrane

Which body part is unsuitable for animals living on land?
gills

Which inducer turns on the expression of the lac genes?
allolactose

What is the most common type of brain injury?
concussion

Changing the shape of an elastic material gives it what type of energy?
potential

What type of traits are features that are passed from one generation to the next called?
inherited traits

What is your body made up of?
trillions of cells

Hemoglobin is responsible for transporting what within our blood?
oxygen

How do bipedal creatures walk?
on two legs

Any sample of matter that has the same physical and chemical properties throughout the sample is called what?
substance

What is a measure of both speed and direction of motion?
velocity

What do fish eggs hatch to form?
fish eggs hatch to form larvae

Commensalism, mutualism, and parasitism are known as what type of relationships?
symbiotic

The modern model of the atom, which scientists call the quantum mechanical model, is based on what scientist's work on orbitals?
schrödinger

Time, mass, length, and temperature are considered to be what kinds of units?
base

What does the heat energy affect in the atmosphere?
winds and weather

What are the taste receptors found as tiny bumps on the tongue called?
taste buds

What is the chemical formula for a glucose molecule?
c6 h12 o6

In physics, the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount time is referred to as what ?
wave frequency

The reactions between alkali metals and water are particularly vigorous and include the rapid production of large quantities of what gas?
hydrogen

Batteries produce voltage through what type of reaction?
chemical

The speed of a particle in what state is directly proportional to the temperature of the system?
gas

Acne results from a blockage of sebaceous glands by what?
sebum

Just as millions of different words are spelled with our 26-letter english alphabet, millions of different proteins are made with the 20 common what?
amino acids

Anaerobic respiration takes place without what?
oxygen

Which other planet in the solar system is the easiest to observe from earth?
mars

What is in the inside of your mouth and nose instead of skin?
mucous membranes

While matter is recycled, ecosystems need a constant input of what?
energy

What is term for the smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of said element?
atom

What is the protein that carries iron that binds with oxygen in red blood cells?
hemoglobin

What branch of science is based on the modern atomic theory, which states that all matter is composed of atoms?
chemistry

Why do sharks sense low levels of electricity?
to locate prey

What membrane is populated by two types of photosystems that cooperate in the light reactions of photosynthesis?
thylakoid

At what point can nutrients enter or exit an ecosystem?
any point

B cells and t cells are examples of what type of cells?
white blood cells

There are three different types of rna. all three types are needed to make what?
proteins

Niche and habitat are concepts related to what broader term?
ecosystem

What do opposite charges do to one another?
attract

What is the name for the sinking of the dense, salty seawater in cold climates?
downwelling

When gas particles heat up and gain energy, what do they do?
move faster

Ion pumps, the biological machines responsible for the selective transport of metal ions, are complex assemblies of what?
proteins

Lack of proper food over a period of time can lead to what condition, where the body is not getting enough nutrients to grow and stay healthy?
malnutrition

Two water molecules contain 4 hydrogen atoms and how many oxygen atoms?
2

The carrying angle is larger in females to accommodate their what?
wider pelvis

Examples of organ systems in a human include the skeletal, nervous, and what?
reproductive systems

Most hormones are controlled by what type of feedback, which causes the hormone to decrease its own production?
negative

What is the stage called for babies that are in the first year of life after birth?
infancy

What forms a barrier between the cytoplasm and the environment outside the cell?
plasma membrane

Over time, what changes solid rock into pieces?
weathering

Eukaryotic cells undergo what kinds of divisions that more primitive cells do not?
mitosis

The orbicularis oris is a circular muscle that moves the lips, and the orbicularis oculi is a circular muscle that does what?
closes the eye

What may have developed to help our ancestors distinguish between ripe and unripe fruits?
color vision

Which stage is specialized for dispersal & reproduction?
adult stage

What three parameters do seismographs measure?
strength, length and distance

What topographic feature does a circle with inward hatches represent on a contour map?
a depression

Which temperatures cause particles of reactants to have more energy?
higher

Not all cells of a leaf carry out photosynthesis. cells within the middle layer of a leaf have chloroplasts, which contain the photosynthetic what?
apparatus

What is the advantage of selecting for certain genetic traits for crops?
promotes productivity

What is given off from plants and taken in by animals?
oxygen

What is the simplest unit that has the fundamental chemical properties of an element?
atom

Bacteria are what kind of cell?
prokaryotes

What is the first stage of cellular respiration?
glycolysis

Who study volcanoes to be able to predict when a volcano will erupt?
volcanologists

What is the term for electric current that keeps reversing direction?
alternating current

How many alleles comes from each parent?
one

How close a measurement is to the correct value for that measurement is known as what?
accuracy

What pigment is required for photosynthesis to occur?
chlorophyll

What begins approximately six weeks after fertilization in an embryo?
ossification

What do you call the energy that must be overcome in order for a chemical reaction to occur, or the minimum energy required to start a chemical reaction?
activation energy

Frogs and toads, salamanders and newts, and caecilians are the three orders of what group of animals?
amphibians

What are vesicles made of?
phospholipids

Deoxyribonucleic acid (dna) is nucleotide that stores what type of information?
genetic

What two basic types of feather does a bird have?
flight and down

Which fuels provide most of the world’s energy?
fossil fuels

The cathode and anode collectively are the electrodes of what?
voltaic cell

What part of the sweet potato store sugar from photosynthesis as starch?
roots

What is the ratio of charge on a capacitor to potential difference across it called?
capacitance

What substances that primarily comprise plasma membranes form a bilayer?
phospholipids

What type of friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface?
sliding friction

Billions of what inside the human digestive tract help us digest food, make vitamins and play other important roles?
bacteria

In a controlled scientific study, what do you call a factor that can take on different values?
variable

What is a group of similar ecosystems with the same general abiotic factors and primary producers called?
biome

Since 1900, four of the five earthquakes of the greatest magnitude occurred near what appropriately nicknamed pacific location?
ring of fire

All chemical changes involve a transfer of what?
energy

What is the most common type of capillary?
continuous

What is the bending of waves around a corner called?
diffraction

In what kind of bond does one atom contribute both of the electrons in the shared pair?
a covalent bond

Mirrors and lenses are used in optical instruments to reflect and refract what?
light

The zygote undergoes many cell divisions before it implants in the lining of what?
uterus

What are carbonated beverages pressurized with?
co2

Which principle states that two species cannot occupy the same niche in a habitat?
competitive exclusion

What happens to the rate of chemical reactions in higher temperatures?
they increase

An alternative to inclusive fitness is group selection, a type of what scenario where small groups of organisms of the same species are effectively acting as single (perhaps colonial) organisms?
evolutionary

The complement system is a series of proteins constitutively found in the what?
blood plasma

What are cations simply named after?
the parent element

Inorganic chemistry refers to the study of materials *not* containing which element?
carbon

How many chambers does an amphibian heart have?
three

Electrons in the "outer shell" are also known as what kind of electrons?
valence

What is created when energy turns a turbine?
electricity

Where in the periodic table of elements are the nonmetals located?
top right

How many different main types of diabetes are there?
two

Where do most amphibians live, salt water or fresh water?
fresh water

Foliation, which forms layers in rocks during metamorphism, is caused by what?
pressure

What type of compounds tend to have high melting points and boiling points?
ionic

What is the molten material deep within the earth?
magma

Objects in motion that return to the same position after a fixed period of time are said to be in what type of motion?
harmonic

What function of the car is affected by the pedal that controls the amount of gas the engine gets?
acceleration

An atom that gains or loses electrons is called what?
ion

What do you require to test a hypothesis?
data

The first law of thermodynamics deals with the total amount of energy in what?
universe

What type of vehicles is able to go to the deepest ocean floor?
remote-control vehicles

What is the turning effectiveness of a force?
torque

What are the 3 orders of amphibians?
frogs, salamanders, caecilians

The sum of the pressures of the hydrogen and the water vapor is equal to what?
atmospheric pressure

What is cellular respiration that proceeds in the presence of oxygen known as?
aerobic respiration

Blood enters the kidney through the which artery?
renal artery

Besides increasing the potential, how else can you increase current in a circuit?
decreasing the resistance

What kingdom in the domain eukarya that includes molds, mushrooms, and yeasts called?
fungi

An excellent solvent that holds heat well and allows hydrogen bonds, what substance has many properties critical to life?
water

Which part of the earth is made of the rigid, brittle, solid crust and uppermost mantle?
lithosphere

What is liquid water falling from the sky called?
rain

The two general functions of roots in plants are to anchor and to do what else?
absorb

What do covalent bonds give atoms a more stable arrangement of?
electrons

What is the most important process for the survival of a species?
reproduction

Which common element is the most found in living organisms?
carbon

What are the organelles on which proteins are made during protein synthesis called?
ribosomes

Chemistry is the study of matter and energy and how they what?
interact

What is the term for the relationship in which one species benefits while the other species is harmed?
symbiotic relationship

Transport vesicles move what type of molecules from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the golgi apparatus?
proteins

Fish use some of their fins to propel themselves through the water and others to do what?
steer

This series of life stages and events that a sexually reproducing organism goes through is called its what?
life cycle

What are small gnawing mammals such as rats and mice called?
rodents

Dutch scientist christiaan huygens' principle of what states that every point on a wavefront is a source of wavelets that spread out in the forward direction at the speed of the wave itself?
wave propagation

Orbiting at a fairly typical 370 kilometers, the international space station is an example of what?
manmade satellite

When plant type alternates from generation to generation what is this called?
alternation of generation

Which type of diabetes involves the pancreas not secreting enough insulin, which causes high levels of glucose in the blood?
type 1

Halides of the transition metals become more covalent with increasing oxidation state and are more prone to what?
hydrolysis

Dense connective tissue contains more collagen fibers than does loose connective tissue. as a consequence, it displays greater resistance to what?
stretching

What does pushing an object over the surface of a ramp cause?
friction

Parasitism, mutualism, and commensalism are all examples of what type of biological relationship?
symbiosis

What  occurs when substances move from areas of lower to higher concentration or when very large molecules are transported?
active transport

What is the term for  how the air feels at its temperature and humidity
relative humidity

What form does formaldehyde take at room temperature?
gas

Ions are formed when atoms gain or lose what?
electrons

What are the three ways to classify matter based on how light interacts with it?
transparent, opaque, translucent

In what area of the body are sutural bones found?
skull

The ability of matter to combine chemically with other substances is known as?
reactivity

Which types of waves are used for cell phones and radar?
microwaves

Ticks spread bacteria that causes what condition?
lyme disease

Methyl groups are found within what?
amino acids

The primary lymphoid organs are the bone marrow and what else?
thymus gland

Surface tension and viscosity are generally associated with what form or state of matter?
liquids

What catalyst substances may also allow reactions to occur by different pathways that have lower activation energy?
enzymes

Gap genes are defined by the effect of what in that gene?
mutation

The abnormal cells cannot carry oxygen properly and can get stuck where?
capillaries

All atoms of the same element share the same number of what type of particle?
protons

How do oceans help control global warming?
absorbing carbon dioxide

What occurs between long warm climate periods?
ice ages

Which state of matter is characterized by molecules with minimal movement and strong forces between them?
solid

The plasma membrane pulls away from the cell wall as it shrivels. what is this process called?
plasmolysis

What collects fluid from a system of canals in the cytoplasm?
vacuole

What is the name of artificial barriers that people build to protect shorelines?
breakwaters

How many valence electrons does nitrogen have?
5

What is the term for a particle from outside the cell engulfing the cells membrane?
endocytosis

The kidney glomerulus filters blood mainly based on particle size to produce a filtrate lacking cells or large what?
proteins

What is the general composition of the continental crust?
granite

What term refers to the conditions of the atmosphere from day to day?
weather

Gases such as neon, argon, and krypton produce what using electroluminescence?
light

By how many weeks do all major organs start developing?
8

Surface tension is a property that can be found in what state of matter?
liquid

A plant that forms special tissues for storing water in an arid climate is an example of the plant evolving what?
adaptations

What organ is made up of over one million nephrons that dot the renal cortex?
kidney

Human metabolism is the conversion of food into heat transfer, work, and this?
stored fat

What organ do mammals have that is exceptionally large for their body size?
brain

Mammals have four limbs and produce what kind of eggs?
amniotic

Name the missing call of biochemical compound: carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids.
lipids

The ether functional group consists of an oxygen atom which forms single bonds with what other atoms?
carbon

In celsius, what is the boiling point of water?
one hundred degrees

What is the process where sperm from the pollen of one flower fertilizes the egg of another flower?
cross-pollination

What is an organic compound made up of small molecules called amino acids called?
a protein

A solute generally does what to the freezing point of a solvent?
lowers it

The quarks in a particle are confined, meaning individual quarks cannot be what?
directly observed

The monosaccharide glucose is broken down through a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions known as what?
glycolysis

What is the primary gas produced from burning of wood?
carbon dioxide

What type of transport requires no energy and occurs when substances move from areas of higher to lower concentration?
passive transport

What is the force of attraction between a positive metal ion and valence electrons?
metallic bond

How many times does the height of the largest wave increase with each level?
10 times

What does unequal heating of the atmosphere cause?
weather

Which vitamin is made in the skin when it is exposed to sunlight?
vitamin d

During protein synthesis, ribosomes assemble what into proteins?
amino acids

If particles have enough kinetic energy to completely overcome the force of attraction between them, matter exists as a what?
gas

Where is chlorine gas produced?
at the anode

What is the study of energy and how it interacts with matter?
physics

What structure of the body falls between cells and organs in complexity?
tissues

The relationships between groups of different species makes up a ___________.
community

An offspring that inherits a mutation in a gamete will have the mutation in all of its?
cells

How do organisms grow and repair themselves?
cell division

What do halogens require electrons to achieve?
octet

What is the percentage of earthquakes that take place within a plate, away from plate boundaries?
5%

Despite their name, what scientists study the atmosphere rather than colliding space rocks?
meteorologists

What is an insect's hard outer exoskeleton made out of?
chitin

What illnesses are caused by damage to the alveoli of the lungs?
pneumonia and emphysema

What do you call a group of organisms of the same species that live in the same area?
population

All the genes in all the members of a population make up its what?
gene pool

Although some have suggested that the uvula is what type of organ, it actually serves an important purpose?
vestigial

The differences in the biomes is due to differences in the what factors?
abiotic

What increases the chances of someone inheriting a mitochondrial disease?
presence of defect mtdna and undefected mtdna

What is often the cause of phenotypic differences between identical twins?
environment

What kind of equal and opposite forces cancel one another out when they act on the same object?
balanced

What are two other terms for dizygotic twins, which make good study subjects because they share many environmental conditions, but only about half of their polymorphisms?
fraternal, non-identical

Many diseases arise from genetic mutations that prevent the synthesis of critical what?
proteins

Pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy is an inherited disorder that causes gradual deterioration of what?
muscles

Plants obtain their energy from the sun through photosynthesis , what do animals obtain their energy from?
organisms

What type of fibrous joint is found between most bones of the skull?
suture

Innate behaviors occur in all animals. however, they are less common in species with higher levels of what?
intelligence

The periodic table is an arrangement of the elements in order of increasing what?
atomic numbers

What type of ions play critical roles in light-dependent reactions?
hydrogen

What moves nitrogen back and forth between the atmosphere and organisms?
the nitrogen cycle

What is caused by human actions that releases chemical substances and particles into the air?
air pollution

The human body has as many as two trillion lymphocytes, and lymphocytes make up about 25% of all of what?
leukocytes

What chemical substances are secreted by animals that communicate by odor or taste?
pheromones

Hydropower is generated with what natural resource?
water

What are the three types of rocks?
igneous, sedimentary, metamorphic

How do yeasts reproduce asexually?
by budding

How many chromosomes are in each set?
23

Iron is oxidized to fe2+(aq) at an anodic site on the surface of the iron, which is often an impurity or this?
lattice defect

Each species has a characteristic number of what coiled structures made of dna and proteins?
chromosomes

What is the name for tiny animals that feed on phytoplankton?
zooplankton

What do marine autotrophs acquire in carbonic acid, its dissolved form?
carbon dioxide

Asexual, sexual, budding, and parthenogenesis are all forms of what?
reproduction

For an exothermic chemical reaction, energy is given off as reactants are converted to what?
products

Which is the ultimate energy source in a bear's food chain?
sun

Insect's antennae are useful for sensing what?
chemicals

"endocrine" and "exocrine" are two types of what?
glands

What is the term for the movement of molecules from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration?
diffusion

What factors determine the effect of a gene?
alleles

What type of craniates have backbones?
vertebrates

What are the most numerous blood cells?
red blood cells

How do autotrophs get food?
make their own

In boys, what hormone stimulates the growth of the larynx and thickening and lengthening of the vocal folds, which causes the voice to drop in pitch during puberty?
testosterone

What is an ionic compound that produces negative hydroxide ions when dissolved in water
base

What is the name for the disease in which cells divide out of control?
cancer

The period immediately following the transmission of an impulse in a nerve or muscle, in which a neuron or muscle cell regains its ability to transmit another impulse, is called the ______ period.
refractory

What kinds of neutron stars emit radiation in pulses?
pulsars

What is the change in behavior based on experience?
learning

Competition with what emerging animal group may have led to extinction of cynodonts about 200 million years ago?
mammals

Within a bud, what is spaced close together because the internodes are very short?
leaves

What controls the opening to the airway and gut?
mandible

When there is no mass in a volume of space, the space is not what?
curved

Cells selective for different odorants are interspersed in what anatomical cavity?
nasal

What has revolutionized human society over the past several decades?
computer technology

What do you call the set of seventeen chemical elements possessing particular importance for a variety of industrial processes, used frequently in modern technology?
rare earth metals

Broca’s area, responsible for the production of language or controlling movements responsible for speech, is nearly always located on what side of the brain?
left

Which theory is the idea that the characteristics of living organisms are controlled by genes, which are passed from parents to their offspring?
gene theory

Phylum chordata consists of two subphyla of invertebrates, as well as the hagfishes and what else?
vertebrates

What forms when nitrogen and oxygen combine at high temperatures?
nitrogen oxide

The posterior end of a typical rib is called what?
head

What is the name of the process in which solid food waste is passed out of the body?
elimination

The epidermis consists mainly of what type of cells?
epithelial

What is the microtubule-organizing center found near the nuclei of animal cells?
centrosome

Glucose and fructose are considered this type of sugar?
monosaccharides, or simple

How many orders can flying birds be divided into?
29

Two types of interference found in waves are constructive and what else?
destructive

What is the name of the tube that carries sperm from the epididymis to the urethra?
vas deferens

What effect occurs when a population suddenly gets much smaller, due to natural disaster or other cause?
bottleneck effect

Matching donor and recipient blood types is important because different blood types have different types of what?
antibodies

Heavily vegetated lands are less likely to experience what?
flooding

Unlike fibrous or cartilaginous joints, the articulating bone surfaces at what joint type are not directly connected to each other with fibrous connective tissue or cartilage?
synovial joint

What do you call the relationship in which members of one species consume members of another species?
predation

In vertebrates, a system of what structures attached to the endoskeleton enables movement?
muscles

What does the central cell develop into after double fertilization?
endosperm

What device is an electrochemical cell or series of cells that produces an electric current?
battery

Where does digestion begin?
mouth

What kind of joints are capable of a wide range of movements, classified as gliding, angular, rotational, or special?
synovial

Hormones vary widely in molecular size and type as well as?
local regulators

What kingdom of organisms constitutes up to 20 percent of all living things on earth in mass?
archaeans

Scientists often classify or organize different objects based on their what?
physical properties

The primary substance that human cells, and ultimately human beings, are made up of is what?
water

The genetic code is universal, unambiguous, and what else?
redundant

An electromagnetic wave begins with what movement by an electrically charged particle?
vibration

What are the sharp projections that specialized cells grow called?
spicules

What is formed when water vapor in the air condenses into tiny droplets?
fog

The main components of the circulatory system are the heart, blood vessels, and what else?
blood

From what do tubeworms found deep in the galapagos rift get their energy from?
chemosynthetic bacteria

What is water falling from the sky called?
precipitation

Coal, oil and natural gas are types of what formed from the remains of once living organisms?
fossil fuels

In a hot water heater, burning fuel causes the water to get hot because combustion is what type of reaction?
exothermic

What is a force that opposes motion?
friction

What is another term for a hand lens?
magnifying glass

The anterior half of the foot is formed by the five what type of bones?
metatarsal bones

What adjective describes the movements that propel the feces during elimination?
peristaltic

What is transferred in an acid-base reaction
hydrogen ion

What is the largest planet in our solar system?
jupiter

What does the ubiquitous generator use to generate currents?
magnetism

What prevents soil erosion on a hillside that is being farmed?
terracing

What do the external female reproductive structures are collectively referred to?
vulva

What is another name for collar cells?
choanocytes

What involuntary muscle is found only in the heart?
cardiac muscle

Most sedimentary rocks form from what?
sediments

What system serves as the relay between the cns and the internal organs?
autonomic nervous system

When pumping blood, the hearts of animals with very long necks must overcome what force?
gravity

The seasonal movements of animals from one area to another is referred to as?
migration

Falling onto what joint can fracture the distal humerus?
elbow

What term is used to describe the energy reserve carbohydrate of animals?
glycogen

What is used to measure current through a resistor?
ammeters

When struck, how are the rigid crystals of ionic compounds likely to react?
break

What type of matter transmits light without scattering it?
transparent

What is the term for the unconscious movements controlled by the somatic nervous system?
reflexes

What organism captures light energy and converts it to chemical energy inside its cell?
phototrophs

By applying salt to an icy road, the melting point of the ice is what?
decreased

How many pairs of chromosomes do human have ?
23 pairs

Where do polychaetes live?
ocean floor

What term describes a gene or sequence on a chromosome that co-segregates (shows genetic linkage) with a specific trait?
genetic marker

What type of blood vessels carry blood away from the heart?
arteries

How many millions of years ago did pangaea begin breaking apart?
250

Continental drift also promotes what speciation?
allopatric

Which kind of mutations have the most dramatic effect on proteins?
nonsense mutations

When skunks are in danger what do they give off?
foul smell

What kind of reproduction produces genetically identical organisms or clones?
asexual

Oceans help control global warming by absorbing what?
carbon dioxide

A phase diagram plots temperature and what else?
pressure

What kind of hormones are derived from cholesterol?
steroid

Eukaryotic cell division involves mitosis and what?
cytokinesis

Why do sodium and chloride ions attract each other?
opposites attract

What layer of soil, essential for farming, has the highest proportion of organic material?
topsoil

What are the organized instructions within dna for making proteins called?
genes

Macrophages, which can swallow and destroy old and dying cells, bacteria, or viruses, are large types of what cells?
white blood cells

What is the distance between the nuclei of two identical atoms bonded together called?
atomic radius

What is the term for water that contains one or more dissolved substances?
aqueous solution

Gall bladder removal surgery does not seriously affect digestion because ______ is still being produced.
bile

The hepatitis virus attacks only cells of what organ?
liver

A rusty bike has been left outside in damp weather too many times, so the iron in the metal parts have?
rusted

What two layers is the skin made of?
epidermis and dermis

What are the three major types of blood vessels?
arteries, veins, capillaries

What is the name of the protective layer of gases that surrounds the earth and blocks harmful rays from the sun?
the atmosphere

What are colonies of cells stuck to a surface called?
biofilms

Trichomoniasis is cause by what type of pathogen?
protozoa

An increase in what, across the periodic table, explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals?
electrons

How many pairs of chromosomes are in the human genome?
23

What measure is resorted to by people who wish to screen out genetic abnormalities in the fetus?
prenatal testing

Who built the first telescope?
galileo

Water can be boiled to kill giardia and most other what?
pathogens

What do you call mixtures of ash and water that travel down river valleys?
lahars

Why do homonuclear diatomic molecules have zero dipole moment?
no difference in electronegativity

The types of white blood cells that arrive at an inflamed site depend on the nature of what?
injury or infection

In what season are temperature inversions more common?
winter

Are thunderstorms more likely where the ground temperatures are extremely high or extremely low?
extremely high

What type of diseases in humans are caused by protozoa?
protist diseases

Shark teeth likely evolved from the jagged scales that cover their skin, called what?
placoid scales

In the human ear, sound waves cause the stapes to press against what?
oval window

What is the term for proportion of amount of product actually produced in a chemical reaction versus predicted amount ?
percent yield

What creates wet and dry zones at different latitudes?
global air currents

What term is used to describe the total spread of values in a sample?
range

Fermentation—of grains to produce beer, and of fruits to produce wine—is an ancient art that humans in most cultures have practiced for how long?
millennia

In which direction does water travel?
downhill

The largest population size that can be supported in an area without harming the environment is referred to as what?
carrying capacity

What are the smallest particles of elements that maintain their unique properties?
atoms

Where does the christmas tree worm live?
tropical coral reefs

What are biomes that occur where a river, a source of fresh water, meets the ocean called?
estuaries

What continuously monitors and repairs its genetic material?
cells

What are the large segments of the earth’s crust that ordinarily move very slowly?
tectonic plates

Which process causes rocks at the earth's surface to change form?
weathering

Chemical reactions always involve energy. when methane burns, for example, it releases energy in the form of what?
heat and light

Alzheimers disease is associated with memory loss in what group of people?
elderly

What global cycle takes place on, above, and below earth’s surface?
water cycle

Why are two different minerals considered different though they have the same chemical composition?
different crystal structures

What type of mapping is critical for identifying  the location of genes that cause genetic diseases?
linkage mapping

When menstrual periods become less frequent and finally cease; this is called?
menopause

What blood protein carries oxygen from the lungs to cells throughout the body?
hemoglobin

What is the most abundant element in the universe?
hydrogen

The product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity is called what?
linear momentum

In response to changing environmental conditions, prokaryotic populations can undergo what process in short periods of time?
evolution

What term means the time in which half of the original number of radioactive nuclei in a sample decay?
half-life

What is a shortage of water that causes the soil to dry from the surface down called?
drought

What are are segmented invertebrates in phylum annelida called?
annelids

What is the connection between the two hemispheres of the brain called?
corpus callosum

Banging on a drum is an example of which type of energy?
mechanical

What do microbes use to make food?
chemicals

Space telescopes avoid such problems completely since they orbit outside the what?
atmosphere

Tendons connecting the scapula to the humerus form what, which is the circle of tendons around the shoulder joint?
rotator cuff

The number of particles of a substance in a given volume is known as?
concentration

Potential differences from various voltage sources are necessary in order to create electrical fields, which result in what flow of charge?
current

What effect is caused by air moving over the earth's surface as it spins?
coriolis effect

The separation of compounds on the basis of their solubilities in a given solvent is known as what?
fractional crystallization

What is the process by which wind blows to make the  ground surface gets lower and rockier ?
deflation

Because trees add water vapor to air, cutting down forests leads to longer periods of what?
drought

Some sea anemones establish what kind of relationship with hermit crabs by attaching to the crab’s shell?
mutualistic

Prokaryotic cells do not have a nucleus but instead generally have a single chromosome, a piece of double-stranded dna located in an area of the cell called the what?
nucleoid

What measures a fluid’s resistance to flow?
viscosity

What happens to the wire in a fuse if it's current rating is exceed?
it melts

Polar climates include polar and which other kind of tundra?
alpine

What disease is given as an example of a sex-linked trait?
hemophilia

What type of feeders are earthworms?
deposit

What part of the plant is the main site of photosynthesis?
leaf

Aluminosilicates are formed by replacing some of the si atoms in silicates by which atoms?
al

In a smoke detector, a battery in the electric circuit creates what between the metal plates?
voltage

Photochemical smog consists mainly of what?
ozone

What lizards can change colors based on the color of their surroundings?
chameleons

Lipids are organic compounds that consist of carbon, hydrogen, and?
oxygen

What do you call the force a machine applies to an object?
output force

In scientific terms, average acceleration is the rate at which what changes?
velocity

Some atoms are more stable when they gain or lose an electron and form what?
ions

Like a blanket on a sleeping person, greenhouse gases act as what for the planet?
insulation

What is the process in which a solid changes directly to a gas without going through the liquid state called?
sublimation

How many forces do objects on earth have acting on them at all times?
two

How often does sperm develop in humans?
continuously

Scientists found that the youngest rocks on the seafloor were where?
mid-ocean ridges

The reproductive tissues of male and female humans develop similarly in utero until a low level of the hormone testosterone is released from male what?
gonads

Flatworms have a concentration of nerve tissue in the head end, which was a major step in the evolution of what organ?
brain

What type of energy travels through matter in wave form?
sound

What speeds up chemical reactions inside cells?
catalysts

What atmosphere do gills help exchange gas in?
water

Community interactions are important factors in what?
natural selection

The end of a pine tree branch bears the male cones that produce what?
the pollen

One seismogram indicates the distance to the what?
epicenter

What is the process of creating complementary strands of mrna called?
transcription

In ancient egypt gold mines were the property of what?
state

The arid environment of a desert, for instance, can quickly deplete an animal of what?
water

What type of chemistry is the study of chemicals containing carbon called?
organic chemistry

What is the muscular organ shaped like an upside-down pear that has a thick lining of tissues called the endometrium?
uterus

What includes all the biotic and abiotic factors in an area and how they interact?
ecosystem

What is used for cooling detectors of infrared telescopes?
liquid nitrogen

What do we call something that pushes or pulls on an object?
force

Velocity is a vector that has both direction and what?
magnitude

What are the two classifications for organisms living in water?
nekton and plankton

Where are hotspot volcanoes commonly found?
the ocean

The muscles of the anterior compartment of the lower leg are generally responsible for dorsiflexion, and the muscles of the posterior compartment of the lower leg are generally responsible for this?
plantar flexion

The presence of what, which acts as a trigger, affects the rate of chemical reaction?
catalyst

What do you call the splitting of the nucleus of an atom into two smaller nuclei?
nuclear fission

What method is used to map the earth on flat paper?
projections

Water molds mostly live in water or moist?
soil

What is the act of noting or detecting phenomenon through the senses
an observation

What two measurements are multiplied to find the area of a rectangle?
length and width

What is the term for biologically meaningful dna sequences?
genes

Which common type of diabetes is also known as noninsulin-dependent or adult-onset diabetes?
type 2

Recognition of pathogens is a function of what type of response?
immune

Typically done to find food or mates, what do you call the regular movement of individuals or populations each year during certain seasons?
migration

What is the vaccine to prevent infection of hpv?
gardasil

Mineral crystals that form when magma cools are usually _______ than crystals that form when lava cools.
larger

What element makes up the majority of coal?
carbon

What do you call a simple machine consisting of a sloping surface that connects lower and higher elevations?
inclined plane

What can be combined with an amine to form an amide?
carboxylic acid

There are about 50,000 vertebrate species, and they are placed in how many different classes?
nine

In which kind of species do open circulatory systems serve additional functions?
some invertebrates

Boyle’s law applies to matter which is in what state?
gas

What do we call heated groundwater that erupts from the ground under pressure?
springs or geysers

Sensory organs that respond to particular sensory stimuli contain cells called what?
sensory receptors

How can we reduce use of energy resources?
conservation

About 50% of all animal species died off between the mesozoic and which other era?
cenozoic

Transforming from a caterpillar to a butterfly requires a lot of what?
energy

What two cycles make up the female reproductive cycle?
ovarian and menstrual

Uranium is an example of a non-renewable resource used to produce what type of power?
nuclear

One of the early signs of cell disease is this "leaking" of what into the body cells?
sodium ions

What does the moving piston in an engine turn?
crankshaft

What type of chloride is a non-volatile material, but does not dissolve in water?
silver chloride

In general, objects expand in all directions as temperature does what?
increases

Paddles and hammers are examples of simple machines that increase the distance over which force is applied, while reducing what?
strength

What two things collide to cause gas pressure?
gas particles and an object

Every human cell has the same what, and each cell has thousands of them?
genes

What are a class of tetrapod vertebrates that produce amniotic eggs called?
reptiles

What characteristic of reptile eggs allows them to be laid on land instead of in water?
they are amniotic

What part of the rainforest commonly has ferns and other ground plants?
understory

The primary function of insulin is to facilitate the uptake of what into body cells?
glucose

Spindle fibers form between the centrioles during prophase i of what process?
meiosis

How many quarks are in each proton and neutron?
three

What is the year cycle that sunspots occur?
11

When an unstable nucleus emits radiation and is transformed into the nucleus of other elements this is called?
radioactive decay

What is manufactured and added to foods to preserve freshness?
trans fat

Scientists think that stars and galaxies make up only a small part of the matter in the universe. what is the rest of the matter called?
dark matter

Why are noninfectious diseases not contagious?
non-pathogen caused

Organisms that "love" acids are known as what?
acidophiles

Which enzyme is used in step three of the polymerase chain reaction because of it's ability to withstand high temperatures?
taq polymerase

What do scientists use to study the deep without going to the seafloor?
remotely operated vehicles

The hemisphere that is tilted away from the sun is cooler because it receives less what?
direct rays

Like the strings of cello, anything that vibrates produces waves of what?
energy

The point in the titration at which an indicator changes color is called what?
end point

On a hot, dry day, plants close their stomata to conserve what?
water

What do you call the system of glands that release chemical messenger molecules into the bloodstream?
endocrine system

Reactant concentrations are highest at which part of a reaction?
beginning

What happens to the temperature of a system during phase change?
remains constant

What is the major cause of outdoor air pollution?
burning fossil fuels

Why does a metal spoon heat up quickly when placed in a hot drink?
low specific heat

What does the megaspore mother cell produce after meiosis division?
four haploid megaspores

Synaptic connections can change over time depending on what?
activity level

What is the body of a roundworm covered with?
tough cuticle

The end of the phospholipid molecule that is polar and attracts water is called what?
hydrophilic

What is known as the universal solvent?
water

Any organism that causes disease is called what?
a pathogen

Electric generators change kinetic energy to what type of energy?
electrical

Brown algae are important commodities for what?
humans

What does the large central vacuole do?
store water

What is the ratio of solutes in a solution to a volume of solvent in a solution known as?
osmolality

What type of rock contains concentrations of valuable minerals?
ores

How many digits do primates have on each extremity?
five

Dna is normally found within what region of a cell?
nucleus

Water and carbon dioxide molecules are reactants in what plant process?
photosynthesis

Gene therapy is a type of what kind of engineering?
genetic engineering

What is mass number?
the total number of protons and neutrons in a nucleus

What rises through solid rocks where conditions are right?
magma

What is the connecting piece of a sperm packed with?
mitochondria

What is a diagram that shows a single way that energy flows throughout an ecosystem?
food chain

Different colors of light differ in terms of which important attribute?
wavelengths

Ion drives have low thrust but high what?
efficiency

For most waves, energy is proportional to what, a term that describes the height of the wave?
wave amplitude

What are the primary causes of bone fractures?
sideways impact or bending

Water is polar and has electrically charged ends, so it is attracted to the oppositely charged end of a phospholipid molecule, which is described by what term meaning "water-loving"?
hydrophilic

What is produced when a base is dissolved in water?
hydroxide ions

What do mammals conserve heat with?
hair or fur

What is a mutation that changes all or much of a particular chromosome?
chromosomal mutation

Defined as a difference in electric potential energy, a source of what is required in order to produce an electrical current?
voltage

What hydrocarbons contain only single bonds between carbon atoms?
saturated hydrocarbons

What is a decrease in the magnitude of the membrane potential?
depolarization

Water pollution occurs when chemicals, sewage, trash, or heat enter what?
water resources

Radioisotopes may vary greatly in their rate of decay, decaying faster if their nuclei are more what?
unstable

Where can composite volcanoes most frequently be found?
convergent boundaries

The digestive, excretory, and reproductive systems of amphibians share a body cavity called what?
cloaca

Vertebrates are a subphylum of what phylum?
chordata

What is the latin name for mercury?
hydrargyrum

The brain is said to contain gray matter, while what related structure contains white matter separated into columns?
spinal cord

What type of behavior occurs naturally in all animals of a given species?
innate

What orbits an atoms' nucleus?
negatively charged electrons

What are the three forms of water as found in nature?
solid, liquid, gas

What type of digestion is chewing an example of?
mechanical

How many major massive extinctions have been since life began on earth?
five

What tool do scientist's use to show the evolutionary pathways and connections among organisms?
phylogenetic tree

What kind of bonds are there between carbon atoms in saturated fatty acids?
single

In winter, water does what, becoming solid and causing hoses to rupture and engine blocks to crack?
freeze

Unlike archaea and eukaryotes, bacteria have a cell wall made of what?
peptidoglycan

What happens to the crust if the moving oceanic crust reaches a deep sea trench?
sinks into mantle

Polygenic traits are controlled by more than one of these?
genes

What system plays a critical role in the regulation of vascular homeostasis?
nervous system

How many nonpolar bonds does an oxygen molecule have?
2

What type of disease occurs when the immune system fails to recognize the body's own molecules?
autoimmune

What organism is an important pioneer on cleared rock and soil surfaces, such as volcanic flows and burned forests?
lichen

What hypothetical link between development of herbivores and plant defenses is observed in nature, for instance in seeds that are unsavory to animals?
coevolution

The term salt can refer to essentially any of what compounds?
ionic

Where is the hypothalamus–pituitary complex located in the body?
diencephalon of the brain

Where is the guinea worm a serious problem?
africa

The reaction of calcium oxide with carbon dioxide forms what?
calcium carbonate

Cilia or flagella structures give protists what ability?
movement

What is characterized by uncontrolled cell division of abnormal cells?
cancer

Our global ecological footprint depends on resource use per person and what population factor?
population density

What do all sound waves begin with?
vibrating matter

Animal starch, called glycogen, is stored in the liver and where else?
muscles

Kepler's laws relate to the motion of what?
planets

Colloids are used industrially as what?
catalysts

What is defined as the temperature plus precipitation of an area over a long period of time?
climate

What manages the material and energy resources of the cell?
metabolism

What is the midpiece of sperm packed with?
mitochondria

Dry soils are relatively unproductive because plants need a sufficient quantity of liquid water to carry out what process?
photosynthesis

The vitamins and minerals contained in all of the food we consume are important for all of our organ systems. however, there are certain nutrients that affect this?
bone health

What type of plants supplement their mineral nutrition by digesting animals?
carnivorous

Daughter cells divide by what?
meiosis

Phytochromes regulate many plant responses to what?
light

Carbon dioxide molecules consist of a central carbon atom bonded to how many oxygen atoms?
two

Survivorship curves show the distribution of individuals in a population according to what metric?
age

Electrons are not shared equally between the two atoms in which type of covalent bonds?
polar

What is above each leaf scar?
an axillary bud

Ultimately, the fluid that is lost from the blood vessels is returned through what system?
lymphatic

What type energy sources emit fewer or no greenhouse gases?
renewable

Stars spend most of their lives on the main sequence, fusing hydrogen into what?
helium

What is a measure of how hot or cold the air is?
temperature

Where are more of an insect's internal organs kept?
the abdomen

What is the measure of kinetic energy of the particles in matter?
temperature

What is the name for the tiny air sacs at the end of bronchioles?
alveoli

What is the source of most of the energy used?
the sun

What flows across the membrane resulting in changes in the membrane potential?
ions

The standard reduction potential can be determined by subtracting the standard reduction potential for the reaction occurring at the anode from the standard reduction potential for the reaction occurring at this?
cathode

What are proteins made up of?
amino acids

What proteins synthesized in cells act as catalysts?
enzymes

What element is the sun mostly made up of?
hydrogen

What shape is the gametophyte in ferns?
heart-shaped

What makes sunsets appear red?
rayleigh scattering

Skeletal and muscular are examples of what type of system?
organ system

What is the process where light bounces back from surfaces that it cannot pass through?
reflection

What are butterflies and bees an example of?
pollinators

What are clouds that form on the ground called?
fog

What is formed when atoms of different elements bond together?
covalent compound

Where a cell resides, how it appears, and what it does define its what?
development fate

What can be defined simply, as a change in position?
motion

What are mars' moons thought to be?
captured asteroids

What is the main greenhouse gas causing global warming?
carbon dioxide

A goiter is a visible indication of deficiency of what?
iodine

Pale skin and reduced eyes in salamanders that live in dark caves are an example of what?
adaptations

Kidney stones are considered a disease that affects which system?
urinary system

The concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution is called?
acidity

Within a group, the ionization energy decreases as the size of the atom gets what?
larger

Temperature can affect what attribute of a siamese cat's coat?
color

What type of locomotion do humans have?
bipedal

Which equation improves upon the ideal gas law by adding two terms: one to account for the volume of the gas molecules and another for the attractive forces between them?
van der waals

What do chemical reactions  need to be activated?
energy

Compared to thoracic and lumbar types, the cervical type of what structures carry the least amount of body weight?
vertebrae

Many plants generate root pressure during which phase?
growing season

The fuel rods are made of a corrosion-resistant alloy that encases the partially enriched uranium fuel; controlled fission of 235u in the fuel produces heat. water surrounds the fuel rods and moderates this?
kinetic energy

Earthquake waves that travel trhough underground rocks in all directions are known as?
secondary waves

What is the final product of the calvin cycle?
glucose

What does an electric conductor cross to generate current?
magnetic field lines

Splitting the nucleus of an atom produces a massive amount of what type of energy?
nuclear energy

What are waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time called?
wave frequency

As temperature increases, the solubility of the majority of solid substances does what?
increases

The process in which animals use visual cues to communicate is known as what?
visual communication

What state is achieved when the forward and reverse reactions proceed at equal rates?
equilibrium

What are 3 types of light?
infrared, visible, ultraviolet

What is an interation between organisms or species for the same resources in an enviroment is called?
competition

What type of organism, including sea stars and sand dollars, is named for their spiny skin?
echinoderms

What is the term for a disease that is not contagious?
noninfectious disease

Red bone marrow, tonsils, spleen, and thymus gland are considered organs of what system?
lymphatic

What is it called when you touch a charged object to the earth?
grounding

What is the basic unit of structure and function of living things?
cell

What are the three types of symbiotic relationships?
mutualism, communalism, parasitism

What is the name of the major components of cell membranes called?
phospholipids

What organ breaks down excess amino acids and toxins in the blood?
liver

What do wavelengths measure the size of?
waves

Lava flows from a volcano and hardens into what?
rock

What is the term for coiled structures made of dna and proteins?
chromosomes

Archaeans produce what kind of gas as a waste product?
methane

The mole fraction of the solvent is just one minus the mole fraction of what?
solute

Electromagnetic specturm is the full spectrum of raidant energy, which is energy emitted and transmitted as what?
waves

What structures formed of twisted actin chains are found in almost every cell, and are numerous in muscle cells and cells that move by changing shape?
microfilaments

What impact can plaque in an artery have on the flow of blood?
restriction

What type of charge do electrons have?
negative

Which cells change the accessibility, transcription, or translation of a gene?
eukaryotic

In eukaryotes, the cell cycle consists of a long preparatory period, called __________ before undergoing cell division.
interphase

Some biochemical processes happen via sequences of reactions which are called what?
pathways

Deep ocean currents are caused by differences in what property at the top and bottom?
density

What forms when a glacier scrapes a large hole in the ground?
glacial lake

What is needed to provide cells with the oxygen they need for cellular respiration?
gas exchange

When magma cools slowly, what texture does it have?
large crystals

The calvin cycle is the fancy name for the metabolic pathway that builds what?
sugar

The use of mercury-based dental amalgam has gone under question in recent years because of concerns regarding what?
the toxicity

Where does much of the blood that enters the atria flow?
ventricles

Batteries produce voltage through what type of reaction?
chemical

A globe is the best way to make a map of what?
whole earth

Bond energy is an indication of the amount of energy needed for what to occur?
chemical reaction

What causes genetic disorders?
mutations

Located above the stratosphere, what layer is the place where meteors burn up?
mesosphere

What composition determines both eruption type and volcano type?
magma

In a pedigree what shape symbolizes males?
squares

Mollusks are probably most closely related to organisms in the phylum annelida , also known as what?
segmented worms

Which bonds are the strongest of the intermolecular forces?
hydrogen

The community of all of the living and nonliving parts of an environment is known as what?
ecosystem

What is the most common type of volcano?
cinder cone

What is the name of the the most efficient possible engine?
carnot engine

Carbon monoxide, radon gas, dust and pet dander are sources of what kind of pollution?
indoor air pollution

What is the cause of existence of molecular solids and liquids?
attractive forces

Meningitis, for example, is caused by a viral or bacterial infection of the tissues covering what?
the brain

What doctors specialize in diseases stemming from glandular issues?
endocrinologists

_________ are one-celled organisms with a nucleus which cause diseases such as malaria.
protozoa

Chemical energy is another form of which energy?
potential energy

Many species secrete a hard external skeleton of what?
calcium carbonate

What is the most common pattern of dispersion?
clumped

Water droplets form when the air reaches 100-percent what?
humidity

Any large molecule is referred to as what?
macromolecule

The rocks that are taken from a mine are full of valuable minerals plus rock that isn't valuable. what is this rock called?
waste rock

Organisms such as goldfish that can tolerate only a relatively narrow range of salinity are referred to as what?
stenohaline

In a liquid, the particles are still in close contact, so liquids have a definite what?
volume

What is the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching called?
conduction

Regularly performing weight-bearing exercise can reduce the risk of what condition that affects bones?
osteoporosis

What do we call structures that have lost their use through evolution, which serve as important evidence of evolution?
vestigial

What is the only way of transferring energy that doesn't require matter?
radiation

The layers of the atmosphere correspond with what changes with altitude?
temperature

What do you call a type of mixture that has the same composition throughout?
solution

What traits do the sponge and tarantula share?
lack of backbone

Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more what?
cells

What do voltmeters measure?
voltage

What is the term for body parts that do not serve their original function?
vestigial structures

The soil beneath a deciduous forest is called what?
pedalfer

What is composed of a calcium cation and a nitrate anion?
calcium nitrate

Not all structural rearrangements of chromosomes produce nonviable, impaired, or infertile individuals. in rare instances, such a change can result in the evolution of what?
new species

Which molecules in the body holds energy?
glucose molecules

What term is used for the difference in the placement of an object from one time to another?
displacement

What kind of reasoning involves formulating generalizations inferred from careful observation and the analysis of a large amount of data?
deductive

What kind of eruption do scientists think is caused by a very large magma chamber erupting entirely in one catastrophic explosion?
supervolcano eruption

The inside surface of the jejunum is covered with tiny projections called what?
villi

What is the most effective color in interrupting the nighttime portion of the photoperiod?
red light

What glands produce the salty fluid that helps cool the body of many mammals?
sweat gland

What shape is the orbit of a planet?
elliptical

What term is defined as the area where a species lives and to which it has become adapted?
habitat

What do fish have that allow them to “breathe” oxygen in water?
gills

The process in which materials move depending on their heat relative to nearby materials is known as what?
convection

What shape is each face of a tetrahedron?
equilateral triangle

Glands release what substance into the blood?
hormones

What's the process responsible for the presence of oxygen in our atmosphere?
photosynthesis

A rise in blood glucose levels triggers the pancreatic release of what hormone?
insulin

What do most ecosystems get energy from?
sunlight

What is the study of viruses called?
virology

What do you call an animal that feeds on other animals?
carnivore

Most scientists think that ordinary matter is less than half of the total matter in the universe; the remaining part includes what mysterious entity?
dark matter

What is the term for gases that absorb heat in the atmosphere?
greenhouse gases

What is the type of cell division that produces gametes called?
meiosis

What causes halide minerals to form?
salt water evaporation

Upon reaching the postsynaptic membrane, what type of chemical messenger binds to and activates a specific receptor?
neurotransmitter

What do heterotrophic animals usually consume?
other organisms

Molecules of gas are rare in what outermost region of the planet's atmosphere?
exosphere

Why is there very little evaporation in the boreal forests?
temperature is too cold

Maltose, lactose, and sucrose are common types of what, which are distinguished by their monosaccharide constituents?
disaccharides

Amplitude describes what about the wave's crest and trough?
the maximum parts

Overproduction of offspring, combined with limited resources, results in what?
competition

What laws regulate radiation doses to which people can be exposed?
radiation protection laws

Digestive enzymes, including which enzyme, start breaking down starches into sugars?
amylase

In prokaryotes, what is composed of a single, double-stranded dna molecule in the form of a loop or circle?
genome

What is formed when nitrogen and sulfur oxides dissolve in rain?
acid rain

Hydroelectric power harnesses the energy of what?
water

Hydras and sea anemones are examples of what form?
polyp

Tropical, temperate, continental, and polar are all examples of what?
climates

What is a longitudinal, flexible rod located between the digestive tube and the nerve cord?
the notochord

At high altitudes, acclimatization increases red blood cells, so there is more what to help transport the available oxygen?
hemoglobin

What type of systemic response involves lymphocytes?
immune

What was the first object to form in the solar system?
sun

Some materials have negative heats of solution; the dissolution of one of these solutes in water is called?
exothermic process

Where are most white blood cells made?
the bone marrow

Blood flows from the right atrium to the right ventricle, where it is pumped into the what?
pulmonary circuit

What are the male gametes called?
sperm

What in hemoglobin gives red blood cells their red color?
iron

Alpha, beta and gamma are three types of what?
radiation

Red-green colorblindness is an example of what kind of trait?
sex-linked

What kind of radiation is greatest at the equator and lessens toward the poles?
solar radiation

What are atoms or groups of atoms called which carry and electrical charge?
ions

What are the salts of fatty acids called?
soaps

What type of numbers specify the arrangement of electrons in orbitals?
quantum numbers

What do atoms become if they lose or gain electrons?
ions

What is the breakdown of unstable elements into stable elements called?
radioactive decay

Observations suggest that a force applied to an object is always applied by what?
another object

How much exercise should a person ideally get during a single day?
hour

The electrolysis of what substance produces hydrogen and oxygen gases
water

What is the shorter loop of the cardiovascular system?
pulmonary circulation

What is the first classification of igneous rocks?
composition

What is the very slow movement of rock and soil down a hillside?
creep

Which type of pressure forces fluid out of the capillary?
hydrostatic

What hits the eardrum and causes it to vibrate?
sound waves

What type of ecologists work to identify and manipulate the processes that most limit recovery of ecosystems from disturbances?
restoration ecologists

Name the two types of nucleic acids.
dna (deoxyribonucleic acid) and rna (ribonucleic acid)

Interactions between plants and other organisms result in cycling of chemical nutrients within what?
ecosystem

In places where crops grow only during part of the year, the land may be bare for a few?
months

What does bowman's capsule form by surrounding the glomerulus?
lumen

What do scientists use to help explain objects or systems in simpler ways?
models

Burning trees produces most of the same pollutants as burning what?
fossil fuels

During which process in bacteria do the chromosome replicates and the two daughter chromosomes actively move apart?
binary fission

What is emitted by atoms that have been excited by thermal excitation, electron collision, or collisions with photons of exactly the right frequency?
light

Translation is the process of ordering the amino acids in the assembly of a?
protein

What is the name of the group that rats are apart of called?
rodents

Fertilization occurs when what material from one flower reaches the female gametes in the same or a different flower?
pollen

What are the tiny packets of energy the sun gives off called?
photons

In humans, each set of chromosomes contains 22 of these and 1 sex chromosome?
autosomes

What eukaryotic organisms cannot make their own food and do not technically eat?
fungi

What do ants and termites eat to help them digest wood and leaves?
fungi

How many types of glands does the dermis contain?
two

What is an upward force that fluids exert on any object that is placed in them?
buoyant force

Atmospheric pressure is increased, causing a greater amount of oxygen than normal to diffuse into the bloodstream of the patient, in what type of therapy?
hyperbaric chamber therapy

An axe head and a doorstop are types of what simple machine?
wedge

Dna encodes instructions for what kind of molecules?
proteins

Who coined the term natural selection?
darwin

When sand is deposited along a shoreline, what is created?
beach

Prosimians are thought to be more similar to the earliest of these?
primates

What arteries carry oxygen-poor blood away from the heart to the lungs?
pulmonary

What are the mass of threadlike filaments on the body of a fungus called?
hyphae

Ionic bonds between two atoms require one metal and one what?
nonmetal

The pressurized gas of earth's atmosphere is contained by what force?
gravity

Cytokinins promote cell division and prevent what?
senescence

Dna transcription is controlled by what type of proteins?
regulatory

Tubeworms deep in the galapagos rift get their energy from what type of bacteria?
chemosynthetic

When female mammalian embryos consist of just a few thousand cells, one x chromosome in each cell inactivates by condensing into a structure called what?
barr body

Oceans are divided into zones bases on distance from shore and what other factor?
water depth

If a mistake is made by dna polymerase while adding nucleotides, incorrect bases are removed and replaced by the correct base, and the process of what continues?
polymerization

The common earthworm and leeches are examples of what type of worm?
segmented

Elements involved in nuclear reactions are what?
radioactive

Circadian rhythms and migration are examples of what kind of behaviors in animals?
cyclic

The articular cartilage is thickest in the upper and back part of the acetabulum, the socket portion of what?
hip joint

What are decomposers that feed on the organic matter left over from other decomposers?
saprotrophs

Heavier isotopes of plutonium are also produced when lighter plutonium nuclei capture what?
neutrons

What parts of the cell does cell differentiation involve changes in?
cytoplasm and cell wall

The head, thorax, and abdomen comprise what type of body structure, possessed by arthropods?
segmented

The renal hilum is the entry and exit site for structures servicing which organs?
kidneys

Photosynthesis changes light energy to what type of energy?
chemical

Fructose and lactose are types of sugars broken down by the body to form what, which is the simplest sugar of all?
glucose

A complementary pair of chromosomes have genes for the same characteristics in the same location on the chromosome are known as?
homologous chromosomes

What dangerous oxygen compound is found in ground level smog?
ozone

Large increases in the diversity of life have resulted from adaptive radiations that followed what?
mass extinctions

What is the source of most electricity?
coal

What kind of motion characterizes waves?
repetitive

Light reactions occur during which stage of photosynthesis?
first stage

What is used to measure, in degrees, the distance north or south of the equater?
latitude

Radiation can be absorbed or shielded by materials, particularly what material used to make protective aprons worn by x-ray administrators?
lead

What is the name for something that consists of all the population in a given area together with the nonliving environment?
ecosystem

The amniotic egg first evolved in what species?
reptiles

A largemouth bass is an example of a cold-blooded animal that conforms to what aspect of the lake it inhabits?
temperature

What makes up the mass number of an atom?
protons and neutrons

Clubmosses are not true mosses, though, because they have what?
vascular tissue

Europa and titan are names of what kind of celestial objects?
moons

What develops in depressions where water flow is low or nonexistent?
bogs

All prokaryotic and some eukaryotic organisms reproduce through what method, where a parent passes all of its genetic material to the next generation?
asexual reproduction

Where does photosynthesis occur in plants?
in chloroplasts

What is defined as force per unit area?
pressure

What word describes a change in behavior that occurs as a result of experience?
learning

What term means the abnormal or excessive extension of a joint - particularly a hinged joint - beyond its normal range of motion, thus resulting in injury?
hyperextension

Burning of methane is a type of what, which involves the breaking and forming of bonds?
chemical reaction

Transparent, translucent, or opaque are properties of matter based on an interaction with what?
light

Hydrogen sulfide is a noxious and toxic gas produced from decaying organic matter that contains what?
sulfur

What is the name of the body system that fights to protect the body from specific pathogens?
immune system

Incomplete dominance and epistasis are both terms that define what?
genetic relationships

What branch of biology focuses on heredity?
genetics

The axon contains microtubules and neurofilaments that are bounded by a plasma membrane known as what?
axolemma

What is the process by which a liquid changes to a solid?
freezing

How are electrons shared in covalent bonds?
equally

What is the most electron-pair bonds a nitrogen atom can participate in?
four

The hypothalamus and pituitary gland are located near the base of this organ?
the brain

What is the most common type of cancer in adult males?
prostate

Distance traveled divided by time is equal to what?
speed

What are people called that choose to study science?
scientists

What is the main cause of outdoor air pollution?
burning of fossil fuels

What is the term for organisms that can maintain a stable body temperature even in the face of large fluctuations in the environmental temperature?
endotherms

What is the term for learning by watching and copying the behavior of someone else?
observational learning

What do we call scientists who study and forecast the weather?
meteorologists

What are atoms called when they have the same number of negative electrons as positive protons in an electrical charge?
neutral

Neon, krypton and argon are examples of what kind of gases, which produce light by electroluminescence?
halogen gases

What might arthropods use as legs for walking?
jointed appendages

What kind of bonds, where electrons are transferred rather than shared, are considered the ultimate in polarity?
ionic bonds

What happens when chemical bonds in a burning log break?
release heat

When what common element forms single bonds with other atoms, the shape is tetrahedral, and when its atoms form a double bond, the shape is planar?
carbon

What objects are made from highly reflective metal that is applied to a curved or flat piece of glass?
mirrors

Fractures, osteoarthritis, and rickets are problems of which body system?
skeletal system

The structure of a neuron allows it to rapidly transmit nerve impulses to other what?
cells

Earthquakes have both longitudinal and transverse components, and these travel at what?
different speeds

What do we call the theory of electromagnetism on the particle scale?
quantum electrodynamics

What part of the continuous dermal tissue system covers stems?
epidermis

What may be the ancestor of placental mammals?
eomaia

What are the two methods of logical thinking?
inductive and deductive

What is the amount of solute that can dissolve in a given amount of solvent at a given temperature?
solubility

What should a pregnant woman avoid while pregnant?
toxic substances

Quantities have two parts: the number (how many) and what else?
he unit

What organ provides the integrative power that underlies the complex behavior of vertebrates?
the brain

What is the only mechanism that consistently causes adaptive evolution?
natural selection

What are four children born at one birth called?
quadruplets

What does liquid change to due to vaporization?
gas

Converging plates can be oceanic, continental, or one of each. if at least one is oceanic, it will subduct. a subducting plate creates what?
volcanoes

Reptiles can be found on every continent except which one?
antarctica

For photosynthesis to begin, the inputs required are sunlight, water, and what?
carbon dioxide

When a stalactite and stalagmite join together, they form a what?
column

What color does red litmus paper turn in the presence of a base?
blue

What is the term for the hard, round object produced within the mantle of a living shelled mollusk?
pearl

What is the term for animal-like protists that are usually single-celled?
protozoa

The cell membrane consists of two adjacent layers of what?
phospholipids

Echinoderms have a unique system for gas exchange, nutrient circulation, and locomotion called the water vascular system. the system consists of a central ring canal and radial canals extending along each arm. water circulates through these structures allowing for gas, nutrient, and this?
waste exchange

What group includes the simplest eukaryotes, including most single-celled eukaryotes?
protists

Tropical rainforest, chaparral, and taiga are what kind of biomes?
terrestrial

One of the most advanced uses of what in medicine is the positron emission tomography scanner, which detects the activity in the body of a very small injection of radioactive glucose?
radioisotopes

What type of disease is muscular dystrophy?
a wasting disease

How many types of tissue are found in animals?
four

The sequence of bases in a gene translates to the sequence of what protein components?
amino acids

Two or more what may bond with each other to form a molecule?
atoms

Like animals, protozoa are heterotrophic and capable of what?
moving

What term is used to describe a solute that is water fearing?
hydrophobic

What is the term for animals that  cannot raise their body temperature on their own?
ectothermic

Kidney stones can form anywhere in what system?
urinary

What organ participates in all digestive activities except ingestion and defecation?
stomach

What is calculated by adding together the atomic masses of the elements in the substance, each multiplied by its subscript (written or implied) in the molecular formula?
molecular mass

What term describes precipitation that flows over the surface of the land?
runoff

At what point is water on the ph scale?
neutrality, 7

Would you find cells that contain a cell wall, a large central vacuole, and plastids in plant or animal cells?
plant cells

What system includes lymph organs, lymph vessels, lymph, and lymph nodes?
immune

What causes acid rain?
air pollution

What helps ensure that, at least, some species will survive environmental change?
biodiversity

The airway and the lungs are part of what organ system?
respiratory

Air quality is a measure of what in the air?
pollutants

Which factor often changes a protein from an inactive form to an active form?
phosphate groups addition

After the film is developed, any unexposed silver bromide must be removed by a process called what?
fixing

What force provides resistance whenever two surfaces are in contact?
friction

What cycle is frequency measured in per second?
hertz

What are the two types of cells?
prokaryotes and eukaryotes

In science, what do you call something that always applies under the same conditions?
scientific law

The pine tree is the sporophyte; its sporangia are located on scalelike structures packed densely where?
in cones

Prokaryotic cells grow to a certain size and then they divide by which process?
binary fission

What can increase the occurance of earthquakes?
two plates sliding

What term is used to describe organelles that are found only in animal cells?
centrioles

What is located at the center of our solar system?
the sun

What is the leading cause of death worldwide?
coronary artery disease

Changes in the color of the statue of liberty owe to oxidation-reduction reactions, or what simpler term?
corrosion

What is the top layer of water farther from shore called?
limnetic zone

Flatworms reproduce sexually. in most species, the same individuals produce both what?
eggs and sperm

The cytoplasm is all the contents of the cell inside the cell membrane, with the exception of what?
nucleus

What is the study of forces in equilibrium?
statics

What body joint incurs the most common overuse injury among runners and other athletes?
knee

Who is called the father of genetics?
mendel

Each endocrine hormone affects only certain "target" cells, which have molecules of what on the surface that enable binding of a given hormone?
protein

What do we call the scientific study of heredity and hereditary variation?
genetics

What do you call any substance in food that the body needs?
a nutrient

What type of waves start when a source of energy causes a disturbance in the medium?
mechanical waves

What term describes the process where organisms convert atmospheric nitrogen into biologically useful chemicals?
nitrogen fixation

As per the kinetic-molecular theory, in what direction do the molecules and ions of liquids move?
random directions

Cephalization refers to the development of what anatomical region, which evolved at the same time as bilateral symmetry in animals?
head

What term describes a region of space around an atom that has a non-zero probability for an electron with a particular energy?
atomic orbital

How do the male gorillas show display behaviors?
showing aggression

A genetic molecule is called dna, which stands for this?
deoxyribonucleic acid

Is sleep an active or inactive state in the brain?
active

What is is a measurement of the force amplification of a machine?
mechanical advantage

What branch of science is the study of the solid earth?
geology

What is harmless water vapor, for a powerplant?
steam

What regulates the passage of blood into capillary beds?
precapillary sphincters

What do you call the symbiotic relationship where a parasite benefits while the host is harmed?
parasitism

What length of time is human gestation commonly divided into?
three trimesters

What substance, involved in most biochemical reactions, is essential to life?
water

What type of tissue covers the outside of a plant?
dermal

Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or what?
pressure

What anatomical structure serves as the conduit of the oocyte from the ovary to the uterus?
uterine tubes

What cell structures are like storage centers and tend to be larger in plant cells?
vacuoles

Oscillations in the transcription of certain genes are at the heart of the molecular mechanisms underlying what biological rhythms?
circadian rhythms

Give an example of a ball-and-socket joint, which has the greatest range of motion, allowing movement in several directions.
shoulder

Difference in electric potential energy are measured in what basic unit?
volts

How many stars are in our solar system?
one

Landslides and mudslides are the most destructive types of what geologic phenomenon?
mass movement

What scientific word, which gives its name to a type of rock, means "to change form"?
metamorphism

The sporophyte phase is the longest phase in the life of what?
gymnosperm

Hair color and skin color are known as what?
traits

Amines are classified according to the number of carbon atoms bonded directly to what atom?
nitrogen

Because core electrons are closer to the nucleus, they are not involved in what?
bonding

The upper portion of the septum is formed by the perpendicular plate of which bone?
ethmoid bone

Cells in green algae divide along cell plates called what?
phragmoplasts

What are saprobes that decompose organic matter?
fungi

Because complex plant carbohydrates such as cellulose are more difficult to digest, what animal diet is associated with a complicated digestive system?
herbivore

What are all cells surrounded by?
cell membrane

The leaves of all of what type of plants have two basic parts in common: the blade and petiole?
flowering plants

Through what do plants move enormous amounts of water from the soil to the atmosphere?
transpiration

What explains why two different species cannot occupy the same niche in the same place for very long?
competive exclusion princple

The cytoplasm of prokaryotic cells has a high concentration of dissolved solutes. therefore, the osmotic pressure within the cell is what?
relatively high

What are the ultimate source of genetic variation?
mutations

The electron beam scans the surface of the sample, usually coated with a thin film of which metal?
gold

In a longitudinal wave, what term is a measure of how compressed particles of the medium become when the wave passes through?
amplitude

All cells have certain parts in common. these parts include the cell membrane, cytoplasm, dna, and what?
ribosomes

Competition within a species is called what?
intraspecific competition

What occurs when rain falls more quickly than water can be absorbed into the ground or carried away by rivers or streams?
floods

What are the building blocks of dna?
nucleotides

Each line in a structural formula represents a pair of shared what?
electrons

What do vertebrate chordates possess that invertebrate chordates do not?
backbone

In vascular plants, what two basic structures are made of dermal, vascular, and ground tissues?
roots and stems

What is the process resulting in living things with beneficial traits producing more offspring?
natural selection

Solar cells create voltages directly from light, while thermoelectric devices create voltage from differences in what?
temperature

What theory goes beyond classical mechanics to describe the behavior of near-light-speed objects?
special relativity

What type of structure between the esophagus and the stomach normally opens only when a bolus arrives?
sphincter

Viroids are plant pathogens much simpler than what, but like them can reproduce only within a host cell?
viruses

"crossing over" occurs during what phase of mitosis?
prophase i

What is the preferred food for almost all primates except for humans?
fruit

What property means that something can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed?
elasticity

Where does all igneous rock come from?
magma or lava

Three ways that waves may interact with matter are reflection, refraction, and what?
diffraction

Sucrose consists of one molecule of glucose and one molecule of what else?
fructose

Many countries have attempted to reduce the human impact on climate change by reducing their emission of what greenhouse gas?
carbon dioxide

What occurs when arterioles lose their normal muscular tone and dilate dramatically?
vascular shock

Large or small numbers are expressed in scientific notation, which use powers of this?
10

Budding in sponges is a form of what type of reproduction?
asexual

Behaviors that are closely controlled by genes and have little to no environmental influence are called what kinds of behaviors?
innate behaviors

Mutations which benefit the organism in which they occur are known as?
beneficial mutations

When gas particles collide, what kinds of collisions are these considered?
elastic

Around 1200 species of what broad animal group are currently at risk of extinction due to human activity?
birds

The galápagos islands are a group of 16 volcanic islands 600 miles off the west coast of what continent?
south america

What structures on the gastrodermal cells keep the contents of the gastrovascular cavity agitated and help distribute nutrients?
flagella

What is the factor that affects the solubility of solutes in all three states?
temperature

What kind of ph would you find in water from bogs?
lower ph

Where do most of the digestion reactions occur?
small intestine

What is the name of the process where light is produced without heat?
luminescence

Meats and dairy products link to photosynthesis because the animals were fed what?
plant-based foods

What the scientific concept stating that when looking at two competing theories, the one with fewer assumptions should be chosen?
law of parsimony

What type of map would show average temperatures and rainfall?
climate map

What is the name of the sugar that plants produce to be used as food?
glucose

Just under their skin, marine mammals have a very thick layer of insulating fat called what?
blubber

While in the lungs, blood gives up carbon dioxide and picks up what element before returning to the heart?
oxygen

White blood cells called what travel to areas of the body that are inflamed?
phagocytes

How many valence electrons can be found in a carbon atom?
four

Diaphragm, lungs, and trachea take air deep into the body and provide oxygen gas to what?
bloodstream

What gases move in and out of blood during gas exchange?
oxygen, carbon dioxide

What keeps various species from mating and reproducing outside their own species?
reproductive organ incompatibility

A refrigerator must do work to reverse the normal direction of what?
thermal energy flow

The bone matrix consists of tough protein fibers—mainly what?
collagen

Alkynes are what type of compound?
unsaturated hydrocarbons

Solar cells turn sunlight directly into what?
electricity

What type of invertebrate typically has a single spiraled shell?
gastropod

What are nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts called?
macronutrients

What is observed when two perpendicular flagella moves?
spinning motion

What is the name of a branch of the chemistry that deals with the interconversion of chemical energy and electrical energy?
electrochemistry

Which system in the body exchanges gases with the outside air?
respiratory

What is a double membrane of the nucleus that encloses the genetic material?
the nuclear envelope

What is the highest taxon in the classification of living things?
a domain

Animal-like protists are called what?
protozoa

Mating with no strong pair-bonds is called?
promiscuous

Rna is especially important during synthesis of what?
protein

Like other bryophytes, moss plants spend most of their life cycle as what?
gametophytes

What is the ring of hooks tapeworms use to attach themselves?
scolex

What form because water erodes the outside of curves and deposits eroded material on the inside?
meanders

Which waterfall series is the largest on the planet?
iguassu falls

What term is used to describe modern seed plants that produce seeds in cones?
gymnosperms

What kind of joints does the skull have that do not allow any movement?
fixed joints

The shoulder and hip are examples of what type of joints?
ball and socket

The tails of the hale-bopp comet point away from the sun, evidence that light has what property of motion?
momentum

What type of virus can cause painful sores on the mouth and genitals?
herpes

The flood of sodium ions through the symporter provides the energy that allows what to move through the symporter and into the cell?
glucose

Alternative current is produced when a magnet or coil does what?
moves back and forth repeatedly

What are the chemical formulas for covalent compounds referred to as?
molecular formulas

What do secondary spermatocytes form when completing meiosis?
spermatids

What is the name of the muscle that contracts to cause the joint to straighten?
extensor

Name the process of removing wastes from the body.
excretion

What term means the percentage by mass of each element in a compound?
percent composition

Beaches and deserts collect large deposits of what?
sand

What is the name for animals that have a backbone?
vertebrates

The attractive force between water molecules is what kind of reaction?
dipole reaction

Which procedure helps modern nuclear physics convert lead into gold?
nuclear bombardment

Alkanes are nonpolar and therefore do not attract what?
ions

What do we call the lowest layer of the atmosphere?
troposphere

Oxygenated blood is transported by what system?
circulatory

Internal resistance, or (electrical) resistance in general, involves the resistance of the flow of what?
current

What gas produced by fossil fuel use is a major cause of global warming?
carbon dioxide

What supports most of earth's ecosystems?
sun

Because carbohydrates have a carbonyl functional group and several hydroxyl groups, they can undergo a variety of biochemically important reactions. the carbonyl group, for example, can be oxidized to form a carboxylic acid or reduced to form this?
alcohol

What do earth and the other planets in the solar system make around the sun?
elliptical orbits

What do anglerfish use their glow-in-the-dark, rod-like structure for?
to attract prey

Surface tension is responsible for the fact that small insects can do this on water?
walk

What kind of muscle is responsible for making the human heart beat?
cardiac muscle

Channel proteins and carrier proteins help substances diffuse across what?
cell membrane

Humans building communities to make survival easier is an example of humans as a species changing their what?
environment

When a lower energy level is ______ electrons are added to the next higher energy level.
full

The amount of force applied per given area is called?
pressure

What is the atomic number of magnesium?
12

After the egg is fertilized the mrna is translated into what?
protein

What is the process that ventilates lungs called?
breathing

What aspect of beryllium allows it to absorb x-rays?
low atomic number

What are drilled to monitor groundwater pollution?
test wells

The two smallest carboxylic acids are formic acid and what else?
acetic acid

What incredibly successful species has quickly colonized almost all of earth’s terrestrial habitats, but also impacted earth, its climate, and its environment?
humans

What  prepares the body for fight or flight during emergencies?
sympathetic division

Gymnosperms have evolved to include what?
seeds

How do gametophyte plants form haploid gametes?
through mitosis

What french chemist discovered the radioactive elements polonium and radium?
marie curie

What is another term for the parabolic motion of a thrown object?
projectile motion

Passive immunity arises from the transfer of what to an individual, without requiring them to mount their own active immune response?
antibodies

At equilibrium reactants and what are equally abundant?
products

Mitochondria are thought to have evolved from what kind of cells?
ancient prokaryotic

An acellular, external cuticle protects the _________.
epidermis

The average number of individuals per unit of area or volume is referred to as a population's what?
density

What is the medical term for a condition caused by abnormalities, such as mutations, in your genes or chromosomes?
genetic disorder

What is glucose used for the bacteria?
food

What do carnivores eat?
animals

What is algae easier to covert into that corn is currently used for?
fuel

Dividing net force by total mass yields what?
acceleration

What ensures that seeds germinate only when conditions for seedling survival are optimal?
seed dormancy

The a in atp is short for what?
adenosine

How many fingers do apes have on each hand?
five

Which atomic particle has a positive charge?
the proton

What does the presence of gill slits suggest about humans and fish?
common ancestor

What was first discovered in songbirds that produce new neurons while learning songs?
neurogenesis

Whether focused on ancient life, the life of bacteria, or how humans could live on the moon, four unifying principles form the basis of what branch of science?
biology

What do we call the center of a hurricane where the air is calm and clear?
eye

Mass can be destroyed to release what?
energy

Name the organ located behind the nasal cavity in which both food and air pass through?
pharynx

Both mitosis and meiosis result in eukaryotic cells doing what?
dividing

In resting neurons, the plasma membrane has many open potassium channels but few open of which other channels?
sodium

The theory of evolution by what (and other processes) explains both the diversity of organisms and how populations of organisms change over time?
natural selection

What is formed when a monomer of glucose and a monomer of fructose are joined in a dehydration reaction to form a glycosidic bond?
sucrose

What is the spread of cancer cells beyond their original site called?
metastasis

What is another name for flatworms such as tapeworms and flukes?
platyhelminthes

The lithosphere-asthensophere divisions are based on what?
mechanical properties

The second shell holds a maximum of how many electrons?
8

Olfaction refers to which of the five senses?
smell

What devices convert mechanical energy to electric energy?
electric generators

When oxygen is not bound to heme and the partial pressure of oxygen is low, hemoglobin readily binds to what?
carbon dioxide

What is group 16 of the periodic table referred to?
oxygen group

Restoring nitrogen to the soil is one reason for what agricultural practice?
crop rotation

What is the term for evolution over geologic time above the level of the species?
macroevolution

Is the heat of reaction positive or negative for an endothermic reaction?
positive

The superior nasal concha and middle nasal concha are parts of which bone?
ethmoid bone

The energy a chemical reaction needs to get started is called what kind of energy?
activation

Crossing charges is one method for obtaining what?
subscripts

What do scientists collect to test a hypothesis?
evidence

Fatal swelling of what organ can result from both encephalitis and meningitis, which typically cause a severe headache and a fever?
brain

Gases can undergo diffusion, or the opposite, which is what?
effusion

What science is the study of the occurrence, distribution, and determinants of health and disease in a population?
epidemiology

Amphibian larvae go through what process to change into the adult form?
metamorphosis

Reducing the production of what gas, or removing it from the air, are practices that could reduce global warming?
carbon dioxide

There are a series of rules for naming branched alkanes (and, ultimately, for all organic compounds). these rules make up the system of nomenclature for naming what?
organic molecules

Which theory helps predict future events in weather?
climate change theory

What is defined as a group of living and nonliving things and their environment?
ecosystem

Cancer is caused by mutations, which can be caused by pathogens, chemicals, or what else?
radiation

What is the term for a mutually beneficial relationship in which one organism lives inside the other?
endosymbiosis

All new alleles are formed by what types of mutations?
random

What are seeds plants that produce naked seeds in cones called?
gymnosperms

Water is the solvent in solutions called acids and?
bases

What two gases are the main components of air?
nitrogen and oxygen

Anaerobic prokaryotes can live without what compound in their environment (it's a compound that people do need to live)?
oxygen

What part of earth do many animals use for navigation?
magnetic field

Endocytosis and exocytosis are types of vesicle transport that carry very large molecules across what structure?
cell membrane

What are biochemical compounds that living things use to store energy and make cell membranes?
lipids

What happens to the volume of a balloon when you add moles of gas to it by blowing up?
increases

The addition of starting materials and the removal of end products prevent metabolism from reaching what state?
equilibrium

In what year was the hardy-weinberg theorem formulated?
1908

The regulation of gene expression is extremely important during the development of what?
organism

What does a virus inject into the host cell?
nucleic acid

Mutations in regulatory genes that normally control the cell cycle cause what?
cancer

Blood is made up of red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, and what else?
plasma

What is the term for the study of how living things interact with each other and with their environment?
ecology

What takes place directly after developing a hypothesis in the scientific method process?
testing the hypothesis

What should you use to protect your eyes from chemicals?
eye goggles

Because action potentials are so brief, a neuron can produce hundreds per what?
second

Darwin coined what term to refer to an organism’s relative ability to survive and produce fertile offspring?
fitness

At high pressures, how are the molecules of a gas crowded?
closer together

The number of possible isomers increases tremendously as carbon skeletons increase in what?
size

What are vascular plants that produce seeds in cones called?
gymnosperms

What does photosynthesis change light energy into?
chemical energy

Addiction affects what type of chemical receptors within the brain?
dopamine receptors

What is the ability of an atom to emit, or give off, charged particles and energy from the nucleus?
radioactivity

What group of gases are unusually unreactive?
noble gases

A point defect can be an atom missing from a site in the crystal known as a what?
vacancy

What is the place called where the axon of one neuron meets the dendrite of another?
synapse

Organic chemistry is the study of the chemistry of what?
carbon compounds

Gastropods, cephalopods, and bivalves are examples of what class?
mollusks

What type of cholesterol is commonly referred to as bad?
ldl

Where does most natural gas come from?
wells that produce petroleum

Medical problems associated with the body responding poorly to insulin are commonly associated with what disease?
diabetes

The pancreatic hormones insulin and glucagon maintain glucose homeostasis by tightly regulating the synthesis and breakdown of what?
glycogen

The marsupial embryo is nourished inside the uterus with food from a yolk sac instead of through a what?
placenta

The substances that comprise heterogeneous mixtures can also be separated by what means?
physical

What type of organism has spores that are spread by water and wind?
fungi

Through which organ do hookworm larvae enter the human body?
through the skin

Inside a cylinder, thermal energy is converted to what type of energy of the moving piston?
kinetic energy

To the extent that behaviors are controlled by what, they may evolve through natural selection?
genes

What kind of muscle relationship generally produces back-and-forth movement of a body part?
antagonistic muscles

Science is a process of knowing about the natural universe through what two actions?
observation and experimentation

Through a process called electromagnetic induction, generators change what energy form of a spinning turbine to electrical energy?
kinetic

Footprints, burrows, and waste are considered what type of fossils?
trace fossils

What process of allows multicellular organisms to grow and repair themselves?
cell division

What is the process of a confined gas escaping through a tiny hole in its container called?
effusion

What is a relationship between living things that depend on the same resources?
competition

What is the measure of an individual’s weight-to-height ratio called?
body mass index (bmi)

When you are walking on a sidewalk, what occurs between your shoes and the concrete each time you put down your foot?
static friction

According to the english system measurement, how much is equal to 2 pints, 1 quart, and ¼ of a gallon?
4 cups

Many important crops, such as corn, are planted and harvested as what?
seeds

The turbine of a windmill spins and creates what?
electricity

Found in cord blood and other sources, what kind of cells hold the promise of renewing and repairing body tissues?
stem cells

Which law explains why a ship weighing thousands of metric tons floats on water?
archimedes' law

The urinary system can be considered a smaller part of what other body system?
excretory

Essential minerals that the body needs in tiny quantities are called what?
trace minerals

The process by which leaves collect sunlight and make food is called this?
photosynthesis

What are the three types of rna involved in protein synthesis?
messenger, transfer, and ribosomal

What is the term for chordates with a vertebral column and endoskeleton of cartilage and bone?
vertebrate

What does a keratometer measure in the cornea?
curve

What is it called when an egg develops into an individual without being fertilized?
parthenogenesis

Many adolescents experience frequent mood swings.  name one of the causes for this.
surging hormones

Through what does the nerve impulses travel to the brain?
optic nerve

The difference in electric potential energy which allows for an electric charge to move from one position to another is measured by what si unit?
volt

The properties of the alkali metals are similar to each other as expected for elements in the same what?
family

Which division of the peripheral nervous system carries messages from sense organs and internal organs to the central nervous system?
sensory division

An ether is an organic compound in which two hydrocarbon groups are bonded to the same atom of what?
oxygen

Featuring a stalk-like filament that ends in an anther, what is the male reproductive organ in a flower?
stamen

What controls the movements of hands and arms?
somatic nervous system

Refraction happens when light bends from doing what in a new medium?
changing speed

What is the basic structure that holds plants upright, allowing plants to get the sunlight and air they need?
stem

The waves on the strings of musical instruments are transverse—so are electromagnetic waves, such as visible light. sound waves in air and water are this?
longitudinal

What is the name of the elongated bony structure that anchors the anterior thoracic cage?
sternum

What is the most numerous species on the planet?
bacteria

What are the earth's two poles called?
north and south

Chloroplasts and chromoplasts are examples of which membrane bound organelle containing their own dna?
plastids

Birds are the most numerous  type of what vertebrates?
tetrapod

Viruses were assumed to exist before they were first seen with an electron microscope in which decade?
1930 ' s

Matter is always conserved in what type of reaction?
chemical reaction

Most flowers carry both stamens and carpels; however, a few species are capable of what and are nicknamed "perfect" flowers?
self-pollination

The entry of food into the esophagus marks the beginning of the esophageal phase of deglutition and the initiation of this?
peristalsis

Where are the seeds in gymnosperms found?
in cones

Oil is found in the porous rock layer and trapped by the what?
impermeable layer

The number of valence electrons determines variation of what property in nonmetals?
reactivity

Hydrogen and helium are specifically involved as reactants in what nuclear reaction that is useful for making energy?
nuclear fusion

What is the most widely used form of renewable energy in the world?
hydropower

What energy is the energy of motion?
kinetic

Where do stratus clouds occur in the troposphere?
low

What kind of movement do planets in the solar system make around the sun?
elliptical orbits

Which process breaks down glucose to extract energy for cell metabolism?
glycolysis

What does fluorine attract better than any other element?
shared electrons

What term is used to describe the muscular canal (approximately 10 cm long) that serves as the entrance to the reproductive tract?
vagina

What type of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves?
electromagnetic energy

What are subatomic particles of the nucleus called?
nucleons

What blood pressure reading measures the pressure in the vessels between heartbeats?
diastolic

What holds ionic and covalent compounds together?
electrostatic attractions

Amines are bases; they react with acids to form what?
salts

If water from a spring can't flow downwards, it can spread out to form one of 2 things.  what are they?
pond or lake

Energy is lost as heat between each trophic level due to the second law of what?
thermodynamics

What are electrons in the outer energy level of an atom called?
valence electrons

Halogens tend to form salts with what type of element?
metals

The voltage is measured using a voltmeter, which measures which difference across two points?
potential difference

What is the vertical extent of ocean water called?
water column

Echinoderms are found in many different ocean environments, but most are found where?
in reefs

A convergent plate boundary is created when two plates do what?
come toward each other

When volcanoes erupt, what from the mantle is released as carbon dioxide into the air?
carbon

Sepals, petals, pistils, and stamens are contained in all what, which are actually modified leaves or sporophylls organized around a central stalk?
flowers

What do cells do in order to replace damaged or worn out cells?
divide

What kind of agriculture destroyed about 10% of madagascar's native plants?
slash-and-burn

Chloroplasts are the little green particles in plants made up of what colorful pigment?
chlorophyll

What is the largest organ of the human body?
your skin

What kind of charge does a proton have?
positive

What are boggy regions with thick layers of peat called?
peatlands

What type of compounds make up the cells and tissues of living things?
biochemical

Anything that has mass and takes up space is considered what?
matter

What will you see if you look at a star through a prism?
spectrum

Where is most digestion completed?
the duodenum

Explosive eruptions associated with what can be tens of thousands of times as powerful as an atomic bomb?
volcanoes

What gland secretes its products directly into the urethra through several small ducts
prostate

The complete combustion of alkanes to carbon dioxide is an extremely __________ reaction.
exothermic

What is the study of structure, properties, and interactions of matter?
chemistry

Because several genes, each with more than one allele, contribute to determining height in humans, height is considered what kind of trait?
polygenic

A basidium is the fruiting body of a mushroomproducing fungus, and it forms four what?
basidiocarps

Traditional classification of mammals are based on similarities in what two things?
structure & function

The rest of the energy stored in glucose is lost as what?
heat

Water that is lost through the skin through evaporation from the skin surface without overt sweating and from air expelled from the lungs is known as what?
insensible water loss

What are the only innate behaviors in humans?
reflex behaviors

What occurs when a parent organism breaks into fragments, or pieces, and each fragment develops into a new organism?
fragmentation

What does the triploid cell develop into during fertilization?
endosperm

The law of conservation of matter, which says that matter cannot be created or this?
destroyed

Which particle of an atom has a positive electric charge?
proton

How is a reaction described when the given conditions favor formation of products?
spontaneous

What does an electric field surround?
a charged particle

Lack of what mineral causes rickets?
calcium

What do we call the energy of motion?
kinetic energy

Earthquakes and visible light are examples of what?
waves

There is always a slightly negative pressure within what cavity, helping keep the airways of the lungs open?
thoracic

What property allows cut logs to float on water?
density

Different interatomic distances produce different lattice what?
energies

What organs filter blood and form urine?
the kidneys

A chain of what structures form as an oceanic plate moves over a hotspot?
volcanoes

What is responsible for many properties of covalent compounds, which have relatively low boiling points, cannot conduct electricity, and may not dissolve in water?
covalent bonds

Tanning salons claim to use a “safe” form of what light, with a longer wavelength than that in sunlight?
uv (ultraviolet)

Respiratory therapists or respiratory practitioners evaluate and treat patients diseases affecting what part of the body?
lung, heart, and blood vessels

Within each sporangium, hundreds of what kind of spores develop and are dispersed through the air?
haploid

What delivers power to the chemical factory chloroplasts?
the sun

Which type of bryophytes are named for their horn-like sporophytes?
hornworts

What do you call a carnivore that eats mainly insects?
insectivores

Oxygen has the second highest electronegativity of any element; consequently, it prefers to share or accept electrons from other elements. only with fluorine does oxygen form compounds in this?
positive oxidation states

What component of cells is present in plant and bacterial cells but not animal cells?
cell wall

Energy cannot be created or destroyed - it can only change what?
form

Most fungi can reproduce in which 2 ways?
asexually and sexually

What is a pair of valence electrons in a bonded atom that does not participate in bonding called?
lone pair

When a metal is oxidized and a nonmetal is reduced in a redox reaction, what is the resulting compound called?
ionic compound

A biofilm is a colony of prokaryotes that is stuck to what?
surface

What is the part of the flower that produces pollen?
stamen

What neutralizes the acidity of chyme and acts as a buffer?
the bicarbonate

What type of stress causes horizontal motions in strike-slip faults?
shear

The structure of the boeing 787 has been described as essentially one giant macromolecule, where everything is fastened through cross-linked chemical bonds reinforced with this?
carbon fiber

What is the term for the process in which two atomic nuclei fuse together to make a single nucleus?
fusion

In human beings, when a female becomes pregnant, what is fertilized and then embedded in the uterus?
egg

What has increased the greenhouse effect?
human actions

How many pairs of chromosomes are there?
23

What structure passes oxygen and nutrients to a growing fetus in mammals?
placenta

Light from a distant galaxy can travel different paths to the earth because it is bent around an intermediary galaxy by what?
gravity

What is the fruiting body that occurs after two hyphae mate and form a mycelium with sporangia?
mushroom

What branch of science aims to understand all about our planet and its environments?
earth science

Prokaryotes are successful because of the ________ of reproduction in favorable environments
speed

Where do benthos live in oceans?
on the ocean floor

Hundreds of organelles called myofibrils, made up of two types of protein filaments, are contained in each fiber of what?
muscle

What is the largest known virus?
mimivirus

The temperature at which something melts is refered to as what?
melting point

Solid bedrock vibrates less and therefore does less of what to bedrock?
damage

What branch of science is defined as the study of matter?
chemistry

What are animals that live with tiny zooxanthellae that also photosynthesize?
coral

What usually causes fractures on a bone?
excessive bending stress

What is the magnetic field traditionally referred to as?
bfield

What can ultimately result when species are introduced to a new place and prey on other species?
extinction

In humans, what is the first organ to form and become functional?
heart

What is used to classify tornadoes?
wind speed, damage

What do you call materials that have high resistance to electric current?
electric insulators

What term is used to describe the development of new technology?
technological design

Cell walls, plastids, and a large central vacuole distinguish plant cells from what?
animal cells

Snails, scallops, and squids are what type of invertebrate?
mollusk

Humans create different breeds of organisms using what kind of selection?
artificial selection

The word antibiotic comes from the greek anti, meaning “against,” and bios, meaning this?
life

What are sudden and dramatic losses of biodiversity called?
mass extinction

The ions in ionic compounds are arranged in rigid three-dimensional patterns called what?
crystal lattices

Where was the distinction between total distance traveled and displacement first noted?
one-dimensional kinematics

What science is the study of the shape and arrangement of cells in tissue?
histology

What forms when a sperm fertilizes and egg?
zygote

The field of organic chemistry studies the structure and reactivity of compounds containing what element?
carbon

Where does growth in length occur, above the root cap?
primary meristem

Asci are used by mycelia for what kind of reproduction?
sexual

What is the term used to describe the liquid that moves through the vessels and includes plasma and the cells and sell fragments called platelets?
blood

The density of bone is, in part, related to the amount of what mineral in one’s diet?
calcium

What is the sum of the masses of the atoms in a molecule?
molecular mass

Chloroplasts, leucoplasts and chromoplasts are found in what type of cells?
plant cells

Salt in seawater causes it to have greater what, which is also affected by temperature and pressure?
density

What is the name of a long and low hill of sediments which have been deposited by a glacier?
a drumlin

The temperature of the products is typically lower than the temperature of the reactants in what type of reaction?
endothermic

What is the most common type of cancer in adult females?
breast

Green plants known as producers provide basic food supply for what besides themselves?
animals

The lipids that are connected to the glucose pathways are cholesterol and triglycerides. cholesterol is a lipid that contributes to cell membrane flexibility and is a precursor of this?
steroid hormones

What chemical reaction is the opposite of oxidation?
reduction

What structure is a larger assembly of several polypeptide chains that are now referred to as subunits of the protein?
quaternary structure

The punnett square shows the possible what, and their most likely ratios?
genotypes

Angiosperms produce their gametes in separate organs, which are usually housed in these?
flowers

What are the two types of charges?
positive and negative

What is the name for a change in a single nucleotide in dna?
point mutation

Ocean acidification results from the ocean absorbing what gas from the atmosphere?
carbon dioxide

What are organisms that feed on available plants called?
grazers

What is the limiting factor for bacteria in a dish?
space

Where are some of the greatest concentrations of species found?
in the tropics

What do tadpoles clear out of waterways?
algae

What theory says stresses build on both sides of a fault?
elastic rebound theory

How many pairs of autosomes are there?
three

What are the only living organisms that can make their own food?
plants

The brain and spinal cord are part of what system, which serves as a control center?
central nervous system

What are the highest clouds in the atmosphere?
noctilucent clouds

What type of reproduction results in genetically unique offspring?
sexual reproduction

What is a disorder of glucose metabolism in which insulin production by the pancreas is impaired?
diabetes mellitus

Splitting of the nucleus of a radioactive atom into two smaller nuclei yields what type of reaction, which releases a great deal of energy from a small amount of matter?
nuclear fission

Colliding-beam accelerators create matter from what?
energy

What is the term for the measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object?
weight

Aging is associated with the death of what?
cells

Animals that live in groups with other members of their species are called what?
social animals

What are typically named for their major physical or climatic factors in addition to their predominant vegetation?
terrestrial biomes

What type of vents are giant tube worms found at?
hydrothermal

What results when a force does work?
movement

At the earth’s surface, the air pressure exerted on you is a result of the weight of what above you?
air

What is a common condition caused by stomach acid?
heartburn

Where do the majority of species live?
ocean

What process brings nutrients from the ocean's floor to its surface?
upwelling

Crests and troughs are the high and low points of a what?
transverse wave

What is the term for materials that have been left behind by organisms that once lived?
fossils

A penguin must do what before molting?
increase muscle mass

The pelvic girdle, consisting of a hip bone, serves to attach a lower limb to this?
axial skeleton

Why does water have a high surface tension?
hydrogen bonding

What are the two types of vascular tissues found in vascular plants?
xylem and phloem

What are the two types of photoreceptors in the retina?
rods and cones

Forces which cause objects to turn around continuously in a circle are known as?
centripetal forces

Why is a synthetic diamond not considered a mineral?
minerals must be created naturally

What type of plug is generally used on metal appliances?
3 prong

What term describes the ability of matter to combine chemically with other substances?
reactivity

What occurs when waves interact with other waves?
interference

What is defined in physics as the amount of force pushing against a given area?
pressure

What do you call the heat below earth’s surface that can be used to produce electricity?
geothermal energy

How do most plants create food?
photosynthesis

In a ketone, two of which kind of groups are attached to the carbonyl carbon atom?
carbon groups

Tapeworms are what type of flatworms?
parasitic

In most crustaceans, what two structures fuse to form a cephalothorax?
head and thorax

What class of animal, including hydras and jellies, is considered the simplest to contain a nervous system?
cnidarians

When iron and sulfur are mixed together in a certain ratio and heated, what do they become?
iron sulfide

What do many scientists think are the oldest eukaryotes?
protists

Culprits in the common cold and aids, what infectious agents are far smaller and simpler than bacteria?
viruses

What triangular feature is formed when a river empties into a large body of still water?
delta

Professionals known as genetic counselors can help them understand the risks of?
children being affected

What type of fronts often bring sudden changes in the weather, including different types of precipitation, depending on the season?
cold fronts

Similarity in biochemicals, like the glucose used by virtually all living things for energy, provides evidence of what?
evolution

In type 2 diabetes, body cells do not respond to normal amounts of what hormone?
insulin

What fibres are seen in some vertebrates that twitch at rates far faster than any human muscle?
skeletal muscle fibers

The cytoplasm divides during what process?
cytokinesis

Where do birds store and moisten food that is waiting to be digested?
crop

Where can you find humid subtropical climates?
between 20 and 40 degrees latitude

What type of lenses can correct myopia?
concave lenses

Photoautotrophs including (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) cyanobacteria synthesize their organic compounds via photosynthesis using sunlight as this?
energy source

Glaciers modify the landscape by what?
erosion

The cells in the follicle undergo physical changes and produce a structure called a what?
corpus luteum

Scientists can use what tool to determine an earthquake's strength?
seismogram

How many moons does pluto have?
three

Huge calderas form when the mountain above an empty chamber of what collapses?
magma

What type of bonds are the attractive forces between the positively charged nuclei of the bonded atoms and one or more pairs of electrons that are located between the atoms?
covalent

Chemical elements and water are constantly recycled in the ecosystem through what?
biogeochemical cycles

What system is the spinal cord related to?
nervous system

What is the total range of the energy from the sun called?
electromagnetic spectrum

Plants have specialized organs that help them survive and reproduce in a great diversity of habitats. major organs of most plants include roots, stems, and what?
leaves

The lungs of mammals are unique in having what?
alveoli

The organs of female mammals that that produce eggs are called what?
ovaries

What do you call the patterns and groups of stars in the sky that ancient people observed and made stories about?
constellations

Each enzyme has an optimal what at which its reaction rate is greatest?
temperature

What type of prokaryotes live in habitats without oxygen?
anaerobic

What is the only metal that is liquid at room temperature?
mercury

What do animals store with the help of saturated fatty acids?
energy

What are the dark areas of the moon called?
maria

What do people use from aquifers from springs or wells?
fresh water

What item lost by diffusion and in the urine are replenished by eating?
salt

What is the primary cause of air movement in the troposphere?
differences in heating

In cellular respiration, glucose is broken down and what is made?
atp

The sum of the kinetic and potential energies of a system’s atoms and molecules is called what?
internal energy

After what state is reached, the concentrations of all reaction components remain constant unless a change is made to the system?
equilibrium

What type of reproduction is exemplified by starfish and yeasts?
asexual reproduction

What is the scientific term for stored energy an object has due to its position or shape?
potential energy

What kind of current flows in just one direction?
direct current

Most motions in nature follow ________ rather than straight lines?
curved paths

An object's energy due to motion is known as?
kinetic energy

While populations with unlimited resources grow exponentially, the population of a species will level off when what limit of its environment is reached?
carrying capacity

Group 16 is called what?
the oxygen group

What type of temperatures increase the likelihood of fires?
higher

Fertilizer runoff can create what type of zones in the ocean?
dead zones

What kind of electricity can you generate with the energy found in flowing water?
hydroelectric power

At the time of birth, bones of the brain case are separated by what wide areas of fibrous connective tissue, which later become sutures?
fontanelles

What are inorganic compounds that take the form of discrete molecules called?
molecular compounds

The other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by what?
denitrifying bacteria

What is typical weather for chicago in winter?
cold & snow

What works by providing a lower energy pathway from reactants to products?
catalyst

What is the smallest part of a compound?
molecule

What layer of skin is located right beneath the epidermis?
dermis

Some terrestrial species breathe through their skin and oral cavity because they lack what?
lungs

What is the main type of cell in the nervous system called?
neuron

Many ionic compounds occur as hydrates, compounds that contain specific ratios of loosely bound water molecules, called waters of hydration. waters of hydration can often be removed simply by doing this?
heating

When blood vessels in the head dilate, what kind of severe headache can occur?
migraine

Acne and different types of cancer can affect what large organ?
skin

Prokaryotic cells can only regulate gene expression by controlling the amount of what?
transcription

Where do oceans absorb gases from?
atmosphere

Engaging in relatively simple behaviors helps maintain a nearly constant body temperature for organisms classified as what?
ectotherms

Meningitis is an infection of the membranes that cover the brain and what else?
spinal cord

What use enzymes to break down foreign matter and dead cells?
lysosomes

What is indicated by the ratio of the output force to the input force in a machine?
mechanical advantage

Glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids are the two main types of what in humans?
corticosteroids

What keeps the earth orbiting the sun?
gravity

How do bees communicate to tell other bees where food is located?
waggle dance

Along with nerve tissue, what kind of tissue are lecithins and cephalins important constituents of?
brain tissue

Metal detectors used for airport security work on which principle?
inductance

Methanogens in their gut enable what process in cows?
digestion

The skeleton of lampreys is made of what?
cartilage

How do amphibians reproduce?
sexually

What are scientists called who study the weather and give forecasts?
meteorologists

Autocrine signaling takes place within the same what?
cell

Both dna and rna are what type of acids?
nucleic acids

What kind of a resource is soil, for human purposes?
nonrenewable resource

A natural resource that is consumed or used up faster than it can be made by nature is termed what?
non-renewable

An electrical motor changes electrical energy into what?
mechanical energy

What is name for a piece of collagen-rich skin formed after the process of wound healing that differs from normal skin?
scar

Young eutherians complete their embryonic development within what?
uterus

Nuclear reactors use fission reactions to vaporize water, producing steam to drive a turbine and generate what?
electricity

What type of air do plants take in and use?
carbon dioxide

How long can a large star be on the main sequence stage?
10 million years

What do you call the pattern of lines formed when light passes through a prism to separate it into the different frequencies of light it contains?
atomic emission spectrum

What is the term for a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells?
tight junction

What is at the surface of a cell, arranged in similar bilayer?
phospholipids

Vitamins are organic compounds that are essential in very small amounts for the maintenance of normal what?
metabolism

In eukaryotic cells, what divides before the cell itself divides?
nucleus

The joint that lies between the radius and the ulna is what kind of joint?
pivot joint

Because it damages hair cells, what is the most cause of hearing loss in adults?
exposure to noise

What is regulated to ensure that the correct proteins are made?
gene expression

What mirrors diverge light rays and, thus, have a negative focal length?
convex

During what stage are chromosomes condensed enough to be seen under a microscope?
mitosis

What is an odorless white solid that is harmless unless consumed in large quantities?
sodium chloride

Melting, sublimation, and evaporation absorb what from their surroundings?
heat

What is the series of changes in the reproductive system of a mature female that happens monthly?
menstrual cycle

What is the average number of individuals per unit of area or volume called?
population density

What types of living beings have water vascular systems and unique tube feet?
echinoderms

Which two gases make up the bulk of earth's atmosphere?
nitrogen and oxygen

What is the decayed remains of living organisms called?
humus

The motor thus acts as a generator whenever its coil does what?
rotates

Norovirus causes the inflammation of the stomach and what else?
intestines

What forms when tectonic plates move above a hot spot?
volcanic chain

What is the multicellular diploid stage called?
sporophyte

Myopia is commonly called what?
nearsightedness

The prostate gland secretes a fluid that mixes with sperm to help form what?
semen

About 95 percent of lipids are absorbed in what organ of the digestive system?
small intestine

What type of work called occurs when a system pushes back the surroundings against a restraining pressure?
expansion work

In some parts of the world, too much of the sun's harmful uv radiation gets through because of a hole in what layer?
ozone

What type of animal eats both plants and animals?
omnivores

What is the term for the muscular duct through which sperm are propelled?
the vas deferens

What is the most common cause of cancer?
cell mutations

The testes produce what hormone?
testosterone

Capillaries are narrow-diameter tubes that can fit red blood cells through in single file and are the sites for the exchange of what?
nutrients

Pieces of the cell break off and form a new cell in what type of reproduction that produces genetically identical organisms?
fragmentation

How do most reptiles produce?
sexually

The minimum amount necessary for self-sustained fission of a given nuclide is called what?
its critical mass

What are genes that are close together on the same chromosome called?
linked genes

What do neutral atoms have the same number of?
electrons and protons

Omnivores are animals that eat both plant- and?
animal-derived food

Bacterial dna is contained in a large, circular strand; this single chromosome is located in a region of the cell called what?
the nucleoid

Which primate group generally lives alone?
orangutan

Carbon and what are the second and third most abundant elements in your body?
hydrogen

Glucagon and insulin are produced in what organ?
pancreas

Anagen, catagen and telogen are phases in the growth of what, which involves the root and follicle?
hair

What is the scientific term for the dropping of leaves, fruits, and flowers, which led to the naming of an acid thought to play a role in the process?
abscission

Sudden changes in geologic and climatic conditions can spur what process?
evolution

What is the fluid that carries sperm through the urethra and out of the body, and provides it with nutrients?
semen

In what unit is frequency measured in?
hertz

Mixtures of materials called alloys contain at least one of what type of material?
metal

The challenge of techniques used for proteomic analyses is the difficulty in detecting small quantities of what?
proteins

What type of gas is delivered to homes to use for cooking and heating?
natural gas

Chewing a bite of bread mixes it with what and facilitates its chemical breakdown?
saliva

What is occurring at an alarming rate as a result of global climate change and the constant melting point of ice?
glacier melt

What triggers the fight-or-flight response?
epinephrine

What is the term for the force applied to a wheel and axle?
input force

Magnetic resonance imaging devices use what to cool the superconducting magnets?
liquid nitrogen

Water moving up the plane and evaporating from the leaves is a process known as what?
transpiration

How many bones fuse together to form the cranium?
8

What is the amount of moisture in the atmosphere?
humidity

What heisenberg principle imposes ultimate limits on what is knowable in science?
uncertainty principle

Narrowing of the arterioles causes an increase of what upstream in the arteries?
blood pressure

What are double sugars called?
disaccharides

Cells that undergo cell division continue to have their telomeres shortened, thus telomere shortening is associated with what life process?
aging

Which two basic parts of a plant develop tough outer coatings to protect the plant from the environment?
leaves and stems

What is the name for a kind of animal that eats a mix of plant and animal foods.
an omnivore

Oxygenated air, taken in during inhalation, diffuses across the surface of the lungs into the what?
bloodstream

What substances, which serve as catalysts, are involved in most of the chemical reactions that take place in organisms?
enzymes

What is the type of plant called when its leaves seasonally turn color and fall off?
deciduous plant

Besides the endocrine system, what other system exerts control over all the organ systems of the body?
nervous system

What is the area where an electron is most likely to be found called?
orbital

The part of the ecosystem required by a particular species is endangered when human activity threatens loss of what?
habitat

What is the wavelength of light expressed in?
nanometers (nm)

What is found inside the pores of spongy bone?
bone marrow

The strength of an acid depends on how many of which ions it produces when it dissolves in water?
hydrogen

How many oxygen ions make up an ozone molecule?
three

While light travels at different speeds in different kinds of matter, the speed of light is constant in what condition?
vacuum

What kind of solution might cause animal cells to burst?
hypotonic

Transition metals are superior conductors of heat as well as what else?
electricity

Our digestive system breaks down starch to what?
simple sugars

What happens to a tectonic plate when it subducts?
it melts

A monosaccharide is the simplest carbohydrate and cannot be hydrolyzed to produce a smaller what?
carbohydrate molecule

What is the term for if multiple sperm fuse with an egg?
polyspermy

As air pressures inside and outside of the ear equalize, what phenomenon is produced?
ear popping

How many pairs of chromosomes are there?
23

Food is broken into smaller particles by mastication, a process involving action by what structures?
teeth

Cell communication that occurs over short distances is known as what?
paracrine signaling

Triggering a blink when something touches the surface of the eye, the corneal reflex is what type of reflex?
somatic

Vascular disorders involve problems with the flow of what?
blood

In eukaryotes, mrna may be modified before leaving what?
nucleus

Velocity affects what type of energy more than mass does?
kinetic energy

In which way do vertebrates reproduce?
sexually

Neutrons and protons reside in which part of the atom?
nucleus

What are the two best known baryons?
protons and neutrons

Mutation creates new genetic variation in what?
gene pool

What hormone controls milk production in mammary glands?
prolactin

Cellular respiration brings hydrogen and oxygen together to form what?
water

What are the two components of the autonomic nervous system?
parasympathetic and sympathetic

Where do lancelets live?
shallow ocean water

What is caused when circulating blood puts pressure on the walls of blood vessels?
blood pressure

What is the most common bacterial sti in the u. s.?
chlamydia

In what unit is heat measured in?
joules

In which type of cells are most organelles not found?
prokaryotic cells

Which three colors are called the primary colors of light?
red, green, blue

Water dissolving minerals out of rocks makes ocean water what?
salty

Like the energy content in food, the energy expenditures of exercise are also reported in what units?
kilocalories

What's the term for an allele that's always expressed over another?
dominant

Series and parallel circuits are two basic types of what?
electric circuits

Transport of water and solutes in plants water potential is a measure of the difference in potential energy between a water sample and this?
pure water

Three distinct layers or tunics form the walls of what structures; the first is a smooth, inner lining of endothelial cells in contact with the red blood cells?
blood vessels

Groundwater does what to the rock beneath the ground surface?
erodes it

Technetium is named after the greektechnikos, meaning “artificial,” because all its isotopes are what?
radioactive

What is a galvanic process that can be prevented using cathodic protection?
corrosion

What are drumlins, eskers, and kettle lakes formed by?
glaciers

What is the vector sum of all the torques acting on the object called?
net torque

An electric current flows in a path called what?
electric circuit

What gas can be generated by reacting sodium bromide with elemental chlorine?
elemental bromine gas

What is a close relationship between two species in which at least one species benefits?
symbiosis

Over many generations, the resulting genetic diversity provides valuable raw material for what?
natural selection

What pulls skydivers towards the earth?
gravity

What occurs when a gas passes through an opening that is smaller than the mean free path of the particles?
effusion

What are the preserved remains of animals, plants, and other organisms called?
fossils

What group of elements cannot conduct electricity?
nonmetals

What is the name of a tough, fibrous membrane which protects the outer layer of bone?
the periosteum

Bond lengths are intermediate between covalent single bonds and what?
covalent double bonds

Under a microscope, salt crystals are what shape?
cubes

Where part of the atmosphere is the uppermost mantle?
lithosphere

In a heat map, what color represents the hottest temperatures?
bright yellow

All living things require what, which most ecosystems obtain from the sun?
energy

Kelvin is a temperature measure in which the lowest temperature is what?
absolute zero

The basic fabric of most biological membranes is a double layer of _________ and other lipids?
phospholipids

What is the name for the organs behind the head of a fish that absorb oxygen from water?
gills

What system gets less effective with age, that generally makes older people more disease susceptible?
immune system

Which type of tides are created when the sun and moon's tides match?
spring tides

What is the process of creating an exact genetic replica of an organism called?
cloning

An example of hydrolysis working within our bodies is the process of what?
digestion

What theory can explain virtually all the properties of metals?
band theory

Serious imbalances, cancer and other diseases can result when expression of what goes awry?
genes

Which organ's diseases include kidney stones, infections, and kidney failure due to diabetes?
kidney

What single-celled organism can be either a predator, decomposer, herbivore, or parasite in the food chain?
protozoa

What layer, made of hot, solid rock, is beneath the earth's crust?
mantle

Some bacteria can contaminate food and cause what illness?
food poisoning

The enzyme pepsin works only in the presence of what?
acid

What organisms known as decomposers break down wastes and dead organisms into smaller molecules?
bacteria

Both flukes and tapeworms are parasites with what kind of host?
vertebrate

What is the transfer of information from rna to dna called?
reverse transcription

In science, anything that has mass and volume is considered what?
matter

Cells with different functions often differ in what physical property?
shape

Wich disorder arises when defective valves allow blood to accumulate within the veins?
varicose veins

Ocean water has what property because water dissolves minerals out of rocks?
salty

What term refers to patterns of stars seen from earth?
constellations

What gives the plant cell strength and protection?
a cell wall

If pollination occurs, what does the zygote develop into?
an embryo

Hiv has proteins called what, internal to the envelope, which help stabilize virion shape?
matrix proteins

What are two basic types of pollutants in the air?
primary and secondary pollutants

How do humans learn behaviors?
conditioning

Just about all life processes depend on what?
water

During labor, what do contractions of the muscular walls of the uterus cause?
cervical dilation

How is communication initiated and maintained with spacecraft?
radio waves

Dna replication is the first step in what process for both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells?
cell division

The prostate is formed of both muscular and which other tissues?
glandular

A mammal that reproduces by laying eggs is called what?
monotreme

Adaptations that go along with the active, carnivorous lifestyle of sharks are known as?
acute senses

What is considered to be the control center for homeostatic mechanisms?
hypothalamus

What molecules with a nitrogen base are the basic components of nucleic acids?
nucleiotides

What were the first vertebrates to evolve?
fish

What is defined as the rate of energy transferred?
power

The cochlea and vestibul make up what part of the ear?
inner

An individual with the appropriate number of what for their species is called euploid; abnormalities in this number include trisomy and monosomy?
chromosomes

A, t, g, and c pairs are associated with what substance that is important in genetics?
dna

What female flower structure, which is part of the pistil, receives the pollen grains and passes them to the ovary?
stigma

What is used by sensitive systems to detect even low levels of radiation?
crystals

What is the leading cause of skin cancer?
sunlight

What is cholera?
bacteria

Which element has atomic number 87?
francium

What is the basic chemical building block of matter; it is the simplest chemical substance?
element

What do you call the lower layer of soil that is permanently frozen, and is a frequent feature of tundra?
permafrost

Modern taxonomy is based on many hypotheses' of the evolutionary history of organisms, known as this?
phylogeny

What method plays a role in determining the approximate age of the earth and makes use of uranium?
radioactive dating

The study of energy and energy transfer involving physical matter is what?
thermodynamics

In a science lab, what device would you use to measure the volume of a liquid?
graduated cylinder

Human blood has a buffering system to minimize extreme changes in what?
ph

The unpaired ethmoid bone is located where within the central skull?
at the midline

A statement is considered what if it is open to being falsified?
hypothesis

Name the physical phenomenon of the ocean that has a significant impact on both ocean life and human life.
el nino

What is the process by which large particles, such as cells, are taken in by a cell?
phagocytosis

Budding is a form of what type of reproduction in tunicates?
asexual

Ocean water releases dissolved carbon dioxide into the atmosphere when what happens to the temperature?
it rises

The physical sciences can be divided into physics and what other science?
chemistry

What do you call trees that lose their leaves in the fall and grow new ones in the spring?
deciduous

In which organ of the body does gluconeogenesis primarily take place?
liver

What kind of structure contains the largest known single cell?
egg

While enzymatic hydrolysis proceeds, peristalsis moves the mixture of chyme and digestive juices along what?
small intestine

What is the most common type of muscle in the human body?
skeletal

The last two stages of aerobic respiration require what?
oxygen

The rate of dissolving is influenced by surface area, stirring, and what else?
temperature

What disease unique to humans and is caused by two variola viruses?
smallpox

What is the average kinetic energy of particles of matter?
temperature

How can you prevent your ice cream from getting a sandy texture?
by using fructose

Plants can lose their leaves, flower, or break dormancy in response to a change in what?
seasons

What is the second highest mountain in the world, at over 28,000 feet?
k2

What are the two classifications of natural resources?
renewable and nonrenewable

Maintaining a high metabolic rate takes a lot of what?
energy

What is the photosynthesis factory of the plant?
chloroplast

The process that a plant increases in size is known as what?
growth

What are reversible physical changes in matter called?
changes of state

Compounds that form from two or more nonmetallic elements are called what?
covalent bonds

The ability to maintain a stable internal temperature, despite the climate, is exhibited by members of what animal group?
mammals

What are substances that provide hydrogen ions (h+) and lower ph?
acids

What are mercury manometers often used to measure?
blood pressure

What did rockets help launch into space during their beginning?
satellites

What sound can be heard when sound waves bounce back from a hard object?
echo

Robert merrifield developed the first synthetic approach for making what essential cell substances in the lab?
proteins

Strangeness, charm, bottomness, and topness are properties of what subatomic particle?
quarks

What needs to happen to temperature to cause pressure to increase dramatically?
large increase

Australopithecus afarensis is an ancestor of what primate?
humans

Organs that produce eggs and secrete estrogen are part of what system?
female reproductive system

What are the most common types of compounds found on earth?
carbon-based compounds

Which planet is closest to the sun?
mercury

What do you call it when adult fish of the same species come together in a group and release gametes into the water at the same time?
spawning

What happens to the volume of a gas as the kelvin temperature increases?
it increases

If only one atom of a specific type is present what is not used?
subscript

What are the earliest reptile genus named?
hylonomus

What produces all the cells of the root and the root cap?
apical meristem

What is the master gland of the endocrine system?
pituitary gland

The earth’s biomes are categorized into two major groups named what?
terrestrial and aquatic

What does the thymus gland produce?
t cells

During which phase does dna replication occur in the cell cycle?
synthesis

What kind of interactions do polar substances experience?
dipole-dipole interactions

Which process is glycolysis in during cellular respiration?
anaerobic

Saturated hydrocarbons are given the general name of what?
alkanes

In the cellular process of transcription, dna code is converted into what other kind of code?
rna

If a gyroscope is not spinning, it acquires angular momentum in the direction of what?
torque

Which leukocytes are first to respond to bacterial infections?
neutrophils

What thin whip-like structures help prokaryotes move toward food or away from toxins?
flagella

What common process is used in the production of bread, cheese and alcoholic beverages?
fermentation

Comprising 10 percent of the mass of the brain, what structure has varied functions that all point to a role in the motor system?
cerebellum

What is a segment of dna that carries a code for making a specific polypeptide chain called?
a gene

Introduction of antigens into the body through immunization can confer what benefit?
active immunity

What part of the brain is largest in intelligent mammals?
cerebrum

What is the cause of most ocean waves?
winds

What is the lowest layer of the atmosphere called?
troposphere

What is the biggest group of animals on the planet?
arthropods

The presence of solute particles blocks some of the ability for liquid particles to do what?
evaporate

What are color and hardness physical properties of?
matter

What are steroid hormones made of?
lipids

How many processes contribute to the emergence of viral diseases?
three

What type of scale is the richter scale?
logarithmic

Where is pedocal soil commonly found?
grasslands

What are the key cells in the immune response?
lymphocytes

Where are most chloroplasts found in plants?
leaves

What type of x-linked trait is color blindness?
recessive

What do you call a condensation reaction in which an ester is formed from an alcohol and a carboxylic acid?
esterification

These types of cella support young, growing parts of a plant?
collenchyma cells

What can be used to convert the energy provided by the sun to usable electrical energy?
solar cells

Most plant cells have a large central what?
vacuole

When you heat a pot of water on a stove top, energy moves from the pot to its metal handle by what process?
conduction

Of all the mineral nutrients, what contributes the most to plant growth and crop yields?
nitrogen

What do you call a reaction that consumes energy as it is carried out?
endothermic

What type of rain dissolves and damages stone buildings and statues?
acid rain

What organ packages nutrients absorbed by the digestive system; produces plasma proteins, clotting factors, and bile; and disposes of worn-out cell components and waste products?
liver

What is defined as a push or pull acting on an object?
force

How much time does the moon take to complete one revolution around the earth?
one month

Like other amphibians, frogs generally lay their eggs in moist environments, which are required since the eggs lack what feature?
shells

What is the ratio of a wave frequency to its vibration frequency?
same

What is the hollow and muscular balloon-shaped organ that collects urine?
urinary bladder

Sugars, starches, and cellulose are examples of what biochemical compounds that organisms use for energy?
carbohydrates

During the embryonic stage of vertebrates, the notochord develops into what?
backbone

What category of joints is immovable?
synarthrosis

What do male cones in seed plants contain?
pollen

What kind of harm does a corrosive substance cause?
eats through objects

Receptors for what chemical messengers recognize molecules with specific shapes and side groups, and respond only to those that are recognized?
hormones

A hydraulic jack that makes it possible to lift a car easily is an example of what, meaning it produces mechanical advantages?
simple machine

What process consists of the mechanisms that produce an observed pattern of change?
evolution

Prokaryotic cells have a cell wall located outside of the __________?
plasma membrane

Multiplying the linear momentum of a spinning object by the radius calculates what?
angular momentum

What are responsible for removing excess h+ ions from the blood?
kidneys

What makes up the dense outer layer of bones?
compact bone

What refers to a substance made from two or more elements joined by chemical bonds?
compound

Stress building up at the same rate over time at a fault causes what phenomenon?
earthquakes

Materials made from non-living substances like pebbles and sand are called what?
inorganic

What type of gas levels in the atmosphere are increasing?
greenhouse gas

What is the earths crust composed of?
igneuos rock

Cells that are divided by oncogenes contain damaged what?
dna

When does exchange of dna segments happen between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes?
during crossing-over

What are observable patterns of stars found in the night sky called?
constellations

If you were to filter out all the cells in blood, you would be left with what golden-yellow liquid?
plasma

The simplest organic compounds have hydrogen and what else?
carbon

Temperature and what other environmental factor are important in the activity of an enzyme?
ph level

What glands are wedges of glandular and neuroendocrine tissue adhering to the top of the kidneys by a fibrous capsule?
adrenal glands

What is the force that pulls downward on an object and is measured by weight?
gravity

Which reproduction produces offspring genetically identical to the one parent?
asexual

Water in its solid state is commonly known as what?
ice

Besides the concentration of dissolve oxygen and nutrients in the water, what other factor limits aquatic organisms?
availability of sunlight

Which type of membrane are ribosomes surrounded by?
none

Which scientist was responsible for the theory of evolution by natural selection?
charles darwin

Soft cartilage gradually turns into hard bone through what process?
ossification

Glycerol is a triol, an alcohol which contains three what?
hydroxl functional groups

The parts of the ears involved in balance are called what?
semicircular canals

The sun’s heat can also be trapped in your home by using south facing windows and good what?
insulation

Red blood cells do not perform aerobic respiration, but they do perform what process that is nearly universal to organisms?
glycolysis

Late adulthood begins in the mid-60s and continues until?
death

The concentration of a substance is the quantity of solute present in a given quantity of ___________?
solution

What is the study of rock strata called?
stratigraphy

What is the particular sequence of amino acids in a longer chain called?
amino acid sequence

Stones, infections, and diabetes threaten the health and functioning of what paired organs?
kidneys

What is the name of the outer layer of skin?
the epidermis

What is the major source of water vapor in the atmosphere?
ocean

The release of mature eggs that occurs at the midpoint of each cycle is called?
ovulation

What are the three ways to control the transcription of an operon?
repressive, activator, inducible

Peroxisomes carry out oxidation reactions that break down what acids?
fatty acids and amino acids

The magnitude of the momentum vector is the product of what two properties?
mass and speed

Hydrostatic skeletons are well suited for life in what kind of environments?
aquatic

How do prokaryotic organisms reproduce asexually?
binary fission

Many species use their body shape and coloration to avoid what?
detection by predators

What property of ocean water increases rapidly as the water gets deeper?
pressure

Remember electrons are negatively charged, so ions with a positive charge have lost what?
electron

What type of starch is used for long-term energy storage in animal cells?
glycogen

What contracts to move food throughout the gastrointestinal tract?
muscles

A magnet can exert force on objects without touching them, as long as they are within what?
magnetic field

What field of science seeks to explain how traits are passed on from one generation to the next?
genetics

Saturated hydrocarbons get their name because they are saturated with what atoms?
hydrogen

What is the name of the black opening in the eye that lets light enter?
pupil

Enzymes in saliva help bread down and digest what?
starches and fats

What comes first in the life cycle of a plant?
seed

Within the chloroplast, synthesis of what takes place in the fluid inside the inner membrane called the stroma?
sugar

When referring to genes, what term describes the property of having multiple phenotypic effects?
pleiotrophy

What are intervertebral discs made of?
fibrocartilage

What harmful light does ozone reduce in the upper atmospheres?
ultraviolet light

What device detects and measuresee earthquake waves?
seismograph

While some climate regions have multiple layers, arid regions are poor for development of what?
soil

Some plants open their leaves during the day to collect what?
sunlight

What secretion initiates chemical digestion while also protecting the oral cavity?
saliva

What makes echinoderms force water into the feet and move forward?
muscle contractions

Red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets are all produced where?
in red marrow

Fine-grained mud in the deep ocean comes from silts and clays brought from the land by?
wind

Pseudopods are temporary extensions of what?
the cytoplasm

Ice cubes in cola cause the cola to lose what?
thermal energy

How are protists traditionally classified?
animal-like, plant-like, or fungi-like

Coal is a solid hydrocarbon formed from what type of decaying material?
plant

Many disciplines within the study of biology contribute to understanding how past and present life evolved over time; these disciplines together contribute to building, updating, and maintaining this?
tree of life

A flow of one coulomb per second is called one ampere, which is a measure of what?
electric current

What might eventually happen to a species if it is unable to reproduce?
extinction

What do muscles need to contract?
stimulus

What is considered to be a unique feature of echinoderms?
water vascular system

Noninfectious diseases can't be passed from one person to another. instead, these types of diseases are caused by factors such as environment, genetics and what?
lifestyle

What 'counting' instrument is used to measure radioactivity?
geiger counter

Often primary producers, what term describes species considered the “base” or “bedrock” of a community, having the greatest influence on its overall structure?
foundation

Hurricanes that form in the tropics are called what?
tropical cyclones

What types of flat maps show users changes in land elevation?
topographic maps

Sister chromatids separate as part of anaphase in what process?
mitosis

Vertebrates evolved from primitive forms of which creature?
chordates

Another name for table salt is?
sodium chloride

In iceland, the mid-atlantic ridge is above sea what?
level

The earth's atmosphere, climate, and living things are effected by what feature that covers more than 70 percent of earth's surface?
oceans

What is the nest of cell an egg rests in called?
follicle

The energy of a wave depends on time as well as what other property of the wave?
amplitude

Genetic equilibrium occurs when what process doesn't exist within the population?
evolution

During meiosis, each parent synthesizes gametes that contain only half of their complement of what?
chromosomes

What is evolution that occurs over a long period of time called?
macroevolution

What is the plasma membrane formed by?
a phospholipid bilayer

What is formed when an element gains one or more electrons?
anion

What is the term for the slow wearing down of rocks on earth’s surface?
weathering

Lobsters are what kind of food source?
arthropod

Helicopters store large amounts of rotational energy of what type in their blades?
kinetic

What branch of science is the study of matter and energy?
physical science

Plants and algae maintain the atmosphere. during photosynthesis, they add oxygen and remove what?
carbon dioxide

Electric substations have what devices, which use electromagnetic induction to increase or decrease the voltage of the current?
transformers

By what process does oxygen enter the pores of flatworms?
diffusion

The iconic gray mantle of the human brain, which appears to make up most of the mass of the brain, is called?
cerebrum

What kind of rocks form as an existing rock is altered by high temperature or pressure?
metamorphic

What kind of water are cattails adapted for with narrow, strap-like leaves?
moving water

What is the most abundant living thing on earth that can be found in almost any environment?
bacteria

Oxidation does not necessarily require heating. which is the common and natural method of oxidation?
rusting

Toward the late stages of pregnancy, a drop in progesterone and stretching forces from the fetus lead to increasing uterine irritability and prompt labor. contractions serve to dilate the cervix and expel this?
newborn

Light bends when it passes in from what to what?
air to water

Photosynthesis uses solar energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce energy-storing carbohydrates.what is produced as a waste product?
oxygen

What is the basic unit of computer memory?
byte

What is the first part of the large intestine, where wastes enter from the small intestine?
the cecum

Burning fossil fuels produces air pollution and what?
carbon dioxide

Monosaccharides, particularly glucose, are major nutrients for what?
cells

Covalent solids are formed by networks or chains of atoms or molecules held together by what?
covalent bonds

In response to high blood osmolarity, which can occur during dehydration or following a very salty meal, the osmoreceptors signal the posterior pituitary to release this?
antidiuretic hormone (adh)

The grasp reflex in humans is an example of what kind of behavior?
innate

Antibiotics can cure most infections that are caused by what?
bacteria

Hydrocarbons are made up of carbon and what else?
hydrogen

Archaeal cell walls contain a variety of polysaccharides and proteins but lack what?
peptidoglycan

What are lipids' function in relation to nerves?
protection

What's the name for the point reached at a ph of 7?
equivalence point

Crystallization separates mixtures based on differences in what, which usually increases with temperature?
solubility

Pure substances have a constant composition and can only be changed through what?
chemical reactions

Which water from the equator mixes with cold water from the poles?
warm

In order to determine its molecular formula, it is necessary to know what about the compound?
molar mass

What is the term for much bigger evolutionary changes that result in new species?
macroevolution

What are the effects of light on plant morphology called?
photomorphogenesis

In a magnet, what are the regions called that are the strongest?
poles

What kind of muscle cells undergo twitch-type contractions with long refractory periods followed by brief relaxation periods, allowing the heart to fill with blood for the next cycle?
cardiac muscle

What is a factor in determining weight but not mass?
location

What occurs when two nonpolar liquids are mixed?
nonpolar-nonpolar interactions

Although much of the heart's basic structure is complete by the end of the fifth week, what fetal structures remain until birth or shortly after?
blood shunts

Because sound waves must move through a medium, there are no sound waves in a what?
vacuum

Bicarbonate is the second most abundant anion in the blood. its principal function is to maintain your body’s acid-base balance by being part of these?
buffer systems

What process involves two cell divisions and produces four haploid cells?
meiosis

What happens to a chain of amino acids after it reaches a stop codon?
released from the ribosome

How many electrons can be accommodated in the first electron shell's orbital?
2

Species distributions are a consequence of both ecological and evolutionary what?
interactions

What is the name of the mineral that contains calcium, carbon and oxygen?
calcite

What medical emergency occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to part of the brain, causing death of brain cells?
stroke

What are the strongest magnets made?
electromagnets

What vessels supply blood to the myocardium and other components of the heart?
coronary arteries

An endocrine disease usually involves the secretion of too much or not enough of what?
hormone

What is it called when a gene at one location (locus) alters the phenotypic expression of a gene at another locus?
epistasis

Called the powerhouses of the cell, what organelles are the site of cellular energy production?
mitochondria

What is the name of the major sex hormone in females?
estrogen

What is the smallest unit of a living thing?
cell

What kind of metals have perplexing patterns of electron distribution that don’t always follow the electron filling rules?
transition

The fact that water in a reservoir is elevated above the ground means that it has what kind of energy?
potential

Rich in protein and nutrients, what abundant group of organisms is being touted as an important human dietary source?
insects

In contrast to metals, electrical insulators are materials that conduct electricity poorly because their valence bands are what?
full

What model postulates that electrons orbit the nucleus at fixed energy levels?
bohr

In the case of the wheelbarrow, the output force or load is between the pivot and the what?
input force

What type of electrons are attracted to the positive nucleus?
negative electrons

Present-day plants that have a complex vascular tissue system are called what kind of plants?
vasuluar plants

What tool, used to locate underwater objects, utilizes ultrasound in a way that is similar to echolocation?
sonar

What kind of competition often leads to extinction because the species that is less well adapted gets fewer of the resources that both species need?
interspecific competition

A nephrologist studies and deals with diseases of what organ?
kidneys

Where is the potential energy of a river the highest at?
the source

What are the most numerous and diverse biochemical compounds?
proteins

Where are most plants firmly rooted?
soil

What type of rain dissolves limestone and marble?
acid

What are materials that have a low resistance to electrical current called?
electrical conductors

What mammalian feature serves functions such as filtration and keeping the body warm?
hair

Higher pressures increase the solubility of what?
gases

What is an important level of organization in ecology and the unit of microevolution?
population

When hot water gently rises to the surface, it creates a what?
hot spring

What is the final stage of aerobic respiration, when energy from the krebs cycle is transferred to atp?
electron transport

What state of matter has a definite volume, but not a definite shape?
liquid

Blood leaves the left ventricle via the what?
aorta

What type of animal can be found on every continent except antarctica?
reptiles

Though viruses are not considered living, they share two important traits with living organisms: they have genetic material and they can undergo what process?
evolution

What is our sun's next stage called?
red giant

What type of molecule is carbon dioxide (co2)?
linear

Trimethylamine is one of the substances responsible for the what of spoiled fish?
smell

Making ultrasonic clicks is a clever way that some moths respond to attacks by what flying mammals?
bats

What do plants respond to in their environment?
changes in sunlight or water

Bone marrow is found inside many bones and produces what?
lymphocytes

One species benefits while the host species is harmed in what type of relationship?
parasitism

What is a compound in which all of the atoms are connected to one another by covalent bonds?
covalent network solid

What kind of lakes form when volcanic eruptions create massive holes that fill with water?
crater lakes

The ovaries produce estradiol and progesterone, which cause secondary sex characteristics and prepare the body for?
childbirth

Ions move through what to maintain electrical neutrality in the cell?
the membrane

What are the messenger molecules of the endocrine system?
hormones

What do you call any substance that opposes coagulation?
anticoagulant

What controls every aspect of plant growth and development to some degree?
hormones

Making a specific prediction based on a general principle is known as what type of reasoning?
deductive reasoning

Ripe fruits are usually red, orange, yellow, or what?
purple

What are the lines of force in the electric field around a charged particle called?
field lines

An electric transformer connects two circuits with an iron core that becomes what?
electromagnet

What structure connects the pharynx to the trachea?
larynx

The resultant solution will contain the same amount of solute but a greater amount of what?
solvent

The thin scale-like or flat shape of what cells fits their primary function, to provide a smooth and protective surface?
simple epithelium

During what phase of breathing does the pressure inside the lungs drops to below atmospheric pressure?
inhalation

What type of climates is malaria commonly found in?
tropical and subtropical

Plants that live in the desert are called?
xerophytes

Dolphins are what type of animal?
mammal

What is the energy of moving matter?
kinetic energy

The two parts of photosynthesis photosynthesis takes place in two stages: the light-dependent reactions and which cycle?
calvin cycle

In an atom, what two major types of particles are located in the nucleus?
protons and neutrons

What is the first part of the large intestine, where wastes enter from the small intestine?
cecum

Each pollen grain has two coverings: the exine (thicker, outer layer) and the what?
intine

In stars like our sun, hydrogen atoms join together to create what?
helium atom

How do bacteria reproduce?
binary fission

What sort of gas is found in balloons and blimps, and is used to make them float in the sky?
helium

What color is pyrite?
gold

Planting a row of trees around a field or erecting a fence on a sand dune helps prevent what form of erosion?
wind

What structure connects the fetus to the placenta, allowing the exchange of gases?
umbilical cord

Glass, rubber, and plastics are examples of which type of solids?
amorphous

What is the process bacteria use to break down chemicals into food?
chemosynthesis

A fully developed placenta is made up of a large mass of what?
blood vessels

What is an element that tend to be malleable?
metal

As a diver descends, the increase in pressure causes the body’s air pockets in the ears and lungs to do what?
compress

Many deleterious alleles have such severe effects that a homozygous embryo spontaneously aborts long before what?
birth

What kind of reaction, in general, keeps stars shining?
fusion

What is the most important factor determining soil type?
climate

What are the structural and functional units of the kidney called?
nephrons

What structure, containing many internal membranes, is the site of photosynthesis?
chloroplast

During the day, what type of energy is transferred from the air over the land to the air over the water?
thermal

Which nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain?
optic

What is the only thing that can change an asteroid?
a collision

Radon is inert and generally unreactive because it is which kind of gas?
noble gas

What are the two ways animals can manage their internal environment?
regulating or conforming

What may the jointed appendages of arthropods be used for?
walking

A sperm cell and an egg cell fuse to become what?
fertilized egg

The muscles in arteries and veins that are largely responsible for regulation of blood pressure are known as what type?
smooth muscles

An inversion may result when what kind of mass moves over cold ground?
warm air

The eardrum is part of what part of the ear?
outer

What is never lost and just changes forms?
energy

What is the term for a mixture that varies in its composition?
heterogeneous

What are the "building blocks" of proteins?
amino acids

What is responsible for our sense of balance?
our ears

What technology do scientists use to create models?
computers

What essential molecules can be harmful if ingested in large amounts, especially if they contain saturated fatty acids from animal foods?
lipids

What are two ways cnidarians are able to reproduce?
asexually and sexually

In what human organ system would you find live e. coli bacteria?
digestive system

What carries blood away from the heart?
arteries

What is the most important characteristic of a homogeneous mixture?
uniform composition throughout

The domain geometry for a molecule with four electron pairs is called what?
tetrahedral

What is the gel-like material between the cell membrane and the nucleus called?
cytoplasm

Like mammals and birds, and unlike other reptiles, crocodiles have how many chambers in their heart?
four

What is the phenomenon in which light and sound waves become circular at the point source of a barrier?
diffraction

What is the name of the relatively large gland in the neck that secretes thyroxin?
thyroid

Amplification that occurs in which cells often requires signal transduction pathways involving second messengers?
sensory receptor

As adults, amphibians are completely _______, meaning they feed on other animals.
carnivorous

Approximately how many billion years ago did our solar system begin?
five billion

A type of what organism causes ergot, a disease that impacts crops directly and has more devastating effects on animals?
fungus

Plant-like protists are commonly called what?
algae

Which cell gives rise to all cells of the human body?
totipotent stem cell

What term describes the long tube that connects the mouth to the anus?
gastrointestinal tract

In some ways, a collection of gas molecules represents the simplest form of what?
matter

Are vesicles larger or smaller than vacuoles?
smaller

The duodenum is the first and the shortest part of what, and is where most chemical digestion takes place?
small intestine

Which system consists of all the bones of the body?
skeletal system

What is rusting an example of?
chemical change

What molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen?
water

All compounds, whether ionic or covalent, must be what?
electrically neutral

Which  is the most common sti (sexually transmitted infection) in the united states?
chlamydia

What do all chemical reactions need to get started?
activation energy

What organ does asthma periodically cause to narrow?
lungs

Silver, gold, and copper all conduct what very well?
electricity

Pakicetus and rodhocetus are considered to be ancestors of modern what?
whales

Chemical and physical changes in a system may be accompanied by an increase or a decrease in the disorder of the system, corresponding to an increase or decrease in what?
entropy

What is the only way to completely avoid stis?
avoid sexual contact

What is an ion that is in common to both salts in a solution?
common ion

Prokaryotes and the nitrogen cycle nitrogen is a very important element for life because it is part of proteins and this?
nucleic acids

What property is a measure of the average kinetic energy of molecules?
temperature

A measure of the disorder of a system is called its what?
entropy

What influence does the  horizontal motion of a projectile have on free fall?
none

Larger animals expend more of what to achieve locomotion?
energy

Subshells are subdivisions of what groupings of electrons that can be found surrounding atoms?
orbitals

The number of moles of solute in 1 kg of solvent is defined as what?
molarity

What is the name for the pores in leaves that allow a plant to retain water or exchange gases?
stomata

What is part of a cycle that holds an element or water for a long period of time called?
a reservoir

What theory states that all organisms are made up of one or more cells?
the cell theory

What does rearrangements of chromosomes contribute to the emergence of?
new species

In the universe as a whole, what is the most common element?
hydrogen

What are substances that cannot be broken down into simpler substances with different properties called?
elements

What gas, that is dissolved in solution, is used in carbonated beverages?
carbon dioxide

Fluoride ion is widely used in water supplies to help prevent what?
tooth decay

Amino acids are joined together to form a chain at what molecular structure?
ribosomes

What is the name of the science that studies matter and the changes material substances undergo?
chemistry

Which process changes rocks by heat and pressure?
metamorphism

What is defined as an antigen that causes an allergy?
an allergen

What can be linked together to form disaccharides or polysaccharides?
monosaccharides

What were the first living things to evolve on earth?
prokaryotes

All members of a species living together form a what?
population

What type of disturbance do even dominant plants depend on in many biomes?
periodic

What type of behaviors are triggered by pheromones in moths?
courtship

What do organisms use to store energy?
lipids

The scientific practice of classifying organisms is also known as what?
taxonomy

What is the type of cell division that produces gametes?
meiosis

The force applied to an object is called?
stress

What is the largest mineral group, comprising over 90% of earth's crust?
silicates

Sound navigation and ranging is an acronym for what, which is used to locate underwater objects such as submarines?
sonar

What is the term for the difference in elevation between two contour lines?
contour interval

The same reaction regenerates pyruvate, which is transported to which cells?
mesophyll

What large carboxylic acid with three ionizable hydrogen atoms gives some fruits a sour or tart flavor?
citric acid

How does sap get to the tops of tall trees?
through negative pressure

Each megasporangium has a single functional one of what?
megaspore

Somatosensation refers to what of the five senses?
touch

Respiratory distress syndrome results from insufficient production of what?
pulmonary surfactant

Redox reactions can always be recognized by a change in what number of two of the atoms in the reaction?
oxidation

In humans, the anus is attached to what kind of intestine?
large

What does interspecific competition between species often lead to?
extinction

Radioactive decay can give off energy and what else?
particles

What is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly, but nearby objects appear blurry?
farsightedness, or hyperopia

What novelties can also arise when structures that originally played one role gradually acquire a different one?
evolutionary

What is a gap in rock layers called?
an unconformity

Bacteria are often used to make cheese from what?
milk

Why are atoms of metals good conductors of electricity?
give up electrons

What is the basic unit of an organism called?
cell

All the blood in the human body is filtered about 60 times a day by what?
kidneys

What happens to the energy levels of electrons as they are closer to the nucleus?
they are lower

What is the term for the blockage of an artery by the buildup of fatty plaques?
atherosclerosis

In what type of reproduction do parents of different sexes mate to produce offspring?
sexual reproduction

Insulin and glucagon help keep blood glucose levels in the normal range because of what type of effects?
antagonistic

What phenomenon has severe consequences on both natural and man-made objects, including killing trees and degrading marble statues?
acid rain

What alloy is made from copper and zinc?
brass

The accumulation of what cells begin the development of the vertebral column and thoracic cage?
mesenchyme cells

What are terrestrial biomes determined by?
temperature and moisture

What protects reptiles from injury and loss of water?
scales

What are the different feeding positions in a food chain or web called?
trophic levels

What is the joint where the pelvic girdle and leg come together?
hip joint

Snails, scallops, and squids are examples of invertebrates called what?
mollusks

Synthesis, decomposition, replacement, and combustion are all types of what reaction?
chemical

What are the devices placed in electric circuits where charge can build up, which store energy when charged and release it when they discharge?
capacitors

What is the hinged structure attached to the cranium that allows an animal to grasp and tear its food?
jaw

The svedberg unit is a measure of the rate of what, which is tested in a centrifuge?
sedimentation

Muscles and skin are examples of what, consisting of specialized cells?
tissues

When do cells acquire different identities in an ordered spatial arrangement?
during morphogenesis

What structures sweep laterally, hugging the pelvic walls, then turn medially and pierce the bladder wall obliquely?
ureters

What was the last supercontinent on earth?
pangaea

When conditions deteriorate, hydras can reproduce sexually, forming resistant zygotes that remain dormant until when?
conditions improve

Because collisions are ______, energy can be transferred between molecules during them.
elastic

What is the tendency of an object to remain at rest or remain in motion called?
inertia

The pituitary gland is called the “master gland” of what system?
endocrine

What links together to form long polymeric chains?
nucleotides

What type of electrons does carbon have?
valence

What do doctors call farsightedness or the inability to see close objects clearly?
hyperopia

What type of simple inheritance is too simplified to explain most human traits?
mendelian

The sun emits energy in the form of what?
electromagnetic radiation

The number of electrons in the outer energy level determines what property of nonmetals?
reactivity

Acids are the opposites of what?
bases

What is the process in which gases are exchanged between the body and the outside air?
respiration

Steam consists of what common and essential element in its gaseous phase?
water

The capsid is made from the what that are encoded by viral genes within their genome?
proteins

Methane, ethane, and propane are three of the smallest what?
alkanes

The number of neutrons and electrons may vary or change in an atom. what happens to the number of protons?
remains the same

In biological augmentation, ecologists use what to add essential materials to ecosystems?
organisms

What kind of interference is observed when the paths differ by a whole wavelength, and the waves arrive in phase?
constructive interference

What are mudskipper fish able to do in short distances?
walk

What is the major cause of disease in agricultural crops?
fungi

What type of reproduction occurs in almost all fungi?
sexual

What protists absorb food molecules across their cell membranes?
absorptive

How do dogs lose body heat?
panting

The electron transport chains are located on the inner membrane of which organelle?
mitochondrion

What happens to growth of plants and bacteria in warmer regions?
they grow faster

Electromagnetic waves are generally caused by magnetic fields doing what (or moving in what way)?
vibrating

Exposure to what can increase the amount of pigment in the skin and make it appear darker?
ultraviolet radiation

Most of the trash in the ocean is made of what material?
plastic

What is the name of the glands that produce milk in female mammals ?
mammary glands

The conductive cells within the heart establish the heart rate and transmit it through the what?
myocardium

What is the opening in the front of the eye?
the pupil

Binary transition-metal compounds, such as the oxides and sulfides, are usually written with idealized what?
stoichiometries

What disease refers to the dangerous buildup of fatty materials in blood vessels?
atherosclerosis

Which nerve directly stimulates the contraction of skeletal muscles in the pharynx and larynx to contribute to the swallowing and speech functions?
vagus nerve

What do we call coiled structures made of dna and proteins?
chromosomes

Energy comes in discrete packages called what?
quanta

Which type of cell can carry out more functions, eukaryotic cells or prokaryotic cells?
eukaryotic cells

When vascular disease causes stiffening of arteries, compliance is reduced and resistance to blood flow is increased. the result is more turbulence, higher pressure within the vessel, and reduced blood flow. this increases the work of this?
heart

Animals that do not have internal control of their body temperature are called what?
ectotherms

What do optical fibres look like?
thin glass tubes

Genetics is the branch of biology that focuses on heredity in what?
organisms

What type of protein is a protein molecule that is attached to, or associated with the membrane of a cell or an organelle?
membrane protein

What is defined as the ability to cause changes in matter?
energy

What group of animals has permeable skin that makes them vulnerable to pollution?
amphibians

A period is a horizontal row of the what?
periodic table

What term refers to any method of removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and storing it in another form?
carbon sequestration

What system protects the body from worms, germs, and other agents of harm?
immune

Most members of the animal kingdom have differentiated tissues of four main classes—nervous, muscular, connective, and this?
epithelial

Which ancient fish has just two living species and is at risk of extinction?
coelacanths

A decline in blood flow to what organs stimulates release of the enzyme renin, in turn stimulating the reabsorption of sodium and water?
kidneys

What common air pollutant is characterized by its sharp odor and often triggers asthma attacks?
nitrogen dioxide

In addition to a nucleus what do eukaryotic cells have?
organelles

What term is used to describe a cross between two individuals that have different traits?
hybridization

What also happens when people feel anxious and breathe too fast?
they become lightheaded

Which two systems together provide support to the body and allow for movement?
skeletal and muscular

The chromosomes that have a mixture of maternal and paternal sequence are called what?
recombinant

Different types of home heating systems all function by producing what type of energy?
thermal

Nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts are called what?
macronutrients

Which property changes when a glass breaks?
its physical property

What do you call large, y-shaped proteins that recognize and bind to antigens?
antibodies

What is the process by which plants make their own food?
photosynthesis

In amniotes that lay eggs, the shell of the egg provides protection for the developing embryo while being permeable enough to allow for the exchange of carbon dioxide and this?
oxygen

What term is used to describe viruses that live in a dormant state inside the body?
latency

What is the main component of phytoplankton?
algae

Compounds that contain mainly the elements carbon and hydrogen are called what kind of compounds?
organic compounds

What type of diagnosis happens before a baby is born?
prenatal

Unlike nuclear fission, which involves dangerous radioisotopes, nuclear fusion involves what two harmless elements?
hydrogen and helium

What is another environmental benefit of conserving resources?
less trash

The bright color of poison dart frogs serves what purpose?
warning predators

What consist of chains of small molecules called nucleotides?
nucleic acids

Atmospheric pressure can be measured with what tool?
barometer

What kind of charge do electrons have?
negative

What are lipids that contain phosphorus called?
phospholipids

How many chambers does the stomach of a ruminant have?
4

What states that chemical reactions occur when atoms, ions, or molecules collide?
collision theory

Biological macromolecules are organic, which means that they must contain what?
carbon

What do you call the membrane lining the back of the eye?
retina

Lacking blood vessels, nerve endings, or glands, the epidermis is the outer layer of what?
skin

The deepest region of the adrenal cortex is the zona reticularis, which produces small amounts of a class of steroid sex hormones called what?
androgens

All living things maintain a stable internal environment through what process?
homeostasis

Tropical rainforests are an example of a climate that occurs near what?
equator

What changes the chemical composition of a substance and can only occur through a chemical reaction?
chemical changes

What term is used to describe the way that animals interact with each other or their environment?
animal behavior

What kind of bees are most adult bees in a hive?
worker bees

In most animals, the circulatory system is used to transport blood through the what?
body

In sexually reproducing organisms, parents pass a copy of each type of what to their offspring by producing gametes?
chromosome

At transform plate boundaries, two plates move in which directions?
opposite

The voltages generated at a power plant are stepped up by what passive devices, which then reduce voltage to a safe level at the point of use?
transformers

What is the term for the dark brown or black coating found on exposed desert rocks, which is formed of iron and manganese oxides?
desert varnish

What two ways may catalyst be classified?
homogeneous or heterogeneous

What phylum has the highest number of species on earth?
arthropods

The speed of a wave is a product of its wavelength and what else?
frequency

What type of gas are stars made up of?
hydrogen

What are one of the most abundant organic molecules in living systems and have the most diverse range of functions of all macromolecules?
proteins

A geiger counter is used for detecting what?
radiation

All species have evolved a pattern of living, called a life history strategy, in which they partition energy for growth, maintenance, and what?
reproduction

What are the most diverse plants on earth?
angiosperms

What is the second line of defense?
inflammatory response

What is the term for when organisms need other organisms to survive?
interdependence

What  is an organic compound that is made up of only carbon and hydrogen?
a hydrocarbon

Bile salts produced by the liver assist in breaking apart what kind of fats?
dietary

Where does most of the sound we hear travel through?
air

A reptile's what doesn't generate enough energy to keep their body temperature stable?
metabolism

Bar, circle, and line are examples of what kind of data visualization?
graphs

What is the first phase of mitosis?
prophase

What term means an area where two closely related species continue to interact and reproduce?
hybrid zone

Fungi may have both asexual and sexual stages of what?
reproduction

Geysers erupt because what boiling hot substance is trapped beneath their surface?
water

About one-third of the human cerebral cortex is dedicated to analyzing and perceiving information related to what sense?
vision

Fungus-like protists are what kind of feeders?
absorptive

What is the process in which many new species evolve in a short period of time to fill available niches called?
adaptive radiation

After fertilization, how many cells does a zygote form into?
two

Which common oxidizing agent can be used to oxidize alcohols?
potassium dichromate

What are gemstones known as when light cannot pass through them?
opaque

In biology, a relationship that benefits both entities is known as what?
mutualism

Some animals prepare for the long winters by storing food and going dormant, a behavior called what?
hibernation

Biochemical reactions are optimal at physiological temperatures because many what lose function at lower and higher temperatures?
enzymes

What is the attachment of ducklings to their mother an example of?
imprinting

All chordates are deuterostomes possessing a what?
notochord

In vascular plants, the sporophyte generation is what?
dominant

The combined gradient that affects an ion includes its concentration gradient and its what?
electrical gradient

What is the first cell of a new organism?
zygote

What part of the cell in plants and algae does photosynthesis take place?
organelles

Exemplified by canada and alaska, what kind of climate has cool, short summers and long, cold winters, little precipitation, and abundant conifers?
subarctic climate

What are the only organelles that prokaryotic cells have?
ribosomes

What is the name of the cloud where most long-period comets come from?
oort cloud

Different feeding "positions" in a food chain or web are associated with what kinds of levels?
trophic

Ionic compound atoms of various elements gain or lose electrons to?
produce ions

Sedimentary rocks form in what kind of layers?
horizontal

Plants obtain the molecules for cellular function though what?
photosynthesis

The group of plants that can make their own food from inorganic raw materials in the presence of sunlight are referred to as what?
autotrophic

What type of disorders are caused by mutations in genes or abnormal numbers of chromosomes?
genetic disorders

What is the measure of sound intensity levels?
decibels

What is the temperature at which a substance freezes known as?
freezing point

Blood from what organs enters the left atrium of the heart?
lungs

The farther an area is from the equator, what happens to the temperature?
it gets lower

What sort of issues can be determined by looking for certain particles in amniotic fluid?
genetic disorders

The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by what?
asteroid impacts

What is the name for the line dividing the earth's hemispheres?
equator

Dependent on the frequency of sound waves, what term described how high or low a sound seems to a listener?
pitch

Solar cells convert the energy in sunlight to what type of energy?
electrical energy

What occurs when a parent cell splits into two identical daughter cells of the same size?
binary fission

A group of individuals that consists of genetically related individuals that can breed to produce fertile young is known as what?
species

What is the most dangerous type of radiation?
gamma rays

What is the result when two monosaccharides are bound together?
disaccharide

What are the two major atmospheric gases?
nitrogen and oxygen

What do you call the strands of dna wrapped around proteins, which are located inside the nucleus?
chromosomes

Land could not be colonized by other organisms until what became established?
plants

What are bacteria that stain purple are called?
gram-positive bacteria

When the bud is fully developed, it breaks away from the parent cell and forms a new what?
organism

Arrows and cannon balls are examples of objects with what kind of motion?
projectile

What is the sugar that the cells of living things use for energy?
glucose

What is the most important muscle involved in the process of breathing?
diaphragm

What is the basic characteristic of monoprotic bases?
accepts one proton

What do we call a device used to store electric charge?
capacitor

Has this ever happened to you? you walk across a carpet, reach out to touch a metal doorknob, and get an unpleasant electric shock? .the reason you get a shock is because of what?
electrical charge

What planet is closest to our sun?
mercury

The ordovician-silurian extinction event is the first recorded mass extinction and the second largest. during this period, about what percent of marine species went extinct?
85 percent

A small molecule that binds to a larger molecule is known as a?
ligand

What process that begins in utero during fetal development and continues on into adolescence involves closing of the skull?
ossification

What traits are those that are inherited unchanged in a hybridization?
dominant traits

What is required to break down and build up molecules and to transport molecules across plasma membranes?
energy

The three main rock types are igneous, metamorphic, and what?
sedimentary

What body part does encephalitis attack?
brain

What type of reproduction takes place when an animal simply divides into two parts?
fission

Winds moving air masses causes what?
weather

How many orders of magnitudes bigger is the electric force?
39

What is the term for any way that an animal interacts with other animals or the environment?
animal behavior

A mushroom is only a specialised reproductive part of the whole fungus. the main part of the fungi is underground in a whole web of hyphae, called this?
mycelium

Most oxygen in blood is bound to a protein called what, and carried to the tissues?
hemoglobin

What do we call the only light that people can see?
visible light

Carnivores are animals that eat other animals. the word carnivore is derived from latin and literally means this?
meat eater

What term describes the sequential appearance and disappearance of species in a community over time after a severe disturbance?
succession

What can water's high surface tension be attributed t?
polar molecules sticking together

What  supports life, and is also needed for the water cycle and weather?
atmosphere

The zoospores develop into haploid, multicellular male and female gametophytes, which produce?
gametes

Reducing the number of molecules in a rigid container causes what to decrease?
pressure

What causes a lot of geological activity on the earth?
plate tectonics

The fuel that burns in a combustion reaction in many fossil fuels such as natural gas that consists of carbon hydrogen is known as what?
hydrocarbon

What describes a combination of two or more substances, each of which maintains its own chemical identity?
mixture

Sodium-potassium pumps help nerve cells establish a voltage across their what?
plasma membranes

Tin is oxidized at the anode, while silver ion is reduced at?
cathode

Adding a solute does what to the boiling point of a pure solvent?
increases it

Illnesses caused by bacteria in food are commonly known as what?
food poisoning

Most bacteria may be placed into one of three groups based on their response to gaseous?
oxygen

More uv rays reach the ground due to a decrease in what layer in the stratosphere?
ozone

Two species that share what cannot coexist in a community?
same niche

In a wheel and axle, when force is applied either to the wheel or axle, what aspect of the force does not change?
direction

What can be used to determine the mass of a quantity of material?
molar masses

The thick skin, found only on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet, has an extra what?
layer

What effect does tamiflu have on viruses and cells?
inhibits spread of virus

What is the main ingredient of mothballs?
hydrocarbon naphthalene

What is the column of hot rock that continuously brings hot rock up from the mantle toward the crust?
mantle plume

What color light is actually the absence of electromagnetic waves in the visible spectrum, for humans?
black light

What type of seeds come from plants that were traditionally grown in human populations, as opposed to the seeds used for large-scale agricultural production?
heirloom seeds

What is the organic material that comes from plants and animals that were recently living called?
biomass

What is the simplest form of matter that has a unique set of properties?
element

At least 20 percent of the world’s people do not have a ready supply of what?
clean drinking water

What simple machine consists of two connected rings or cylinders, one inside the other, which both turn in the same direction around a single center point?
wheel and axle

Birds have air sacs that store inhaled air and push it into their what?
lungs

What is in the soil that causes mars to look red?
iron

Convection generally involves the transfer of what type of energy?
thermal

What is the term for a push or a pull on an object?
force

What term is used to describe the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body?
excretion

Which disease occurs when there is not enough hemoglobin in the blood?
anemia

In what state of matter are particles rigidly fixed in space and held tightly to neighboring particles?
solids

What is a network solid and consists of carbon atoms covalently bonded to one another in a repeating three-dimensional pattern?
a diamond

Linnaeus developed binomial nomenclature, which means each organism is assigned what?
two-part name

What do we call the mathematical field of study credited to french mathematician-philosopher rene descartes?
cartesian geometry

Where do skeletal muscles usually attach?
end of bones

What do the cells in the front of a volvox typically develop to help swim towards light?
eyespots

What bodily system handles taking in oxygen, getting rid of carbon dioxide, aiding in speech production and sensing odors?
respiratory system

The atom often (but not always) turns into a different what during the decay process?
element

Females are not influenced by the male sex hormone testosterone during embryonic development because they lack what?
y chromosome

Pressure relationships inspiration (or inhalation) and expiration (or exhalation) are dependent on the differences in pressure between the atmosphere and these?
lungs

Female monotremes share what external opening with reptiles and birds?
cloaca

Collisions between hydrogen atoms demonstrate one form of what?
nuclear fusion

Fluid-filled thylakoids are the site of glucose production in the second stage of what process?
photosynthesis

What are the basic units of structure and function in living organisms?
cells

What concept can be applied to biology, because the structure of an organism, or part of an organism, depends on its function?
form follows function

Is sweat an exocrine or endocrine substance?
exocrine

Nuclei with even numbers of protons, neutrons, or both are more likely to be this?
stable

Some prokaryotes form spores for survival called what?
endospores

What is the liquid inside the central vacuole called?
cell sap

Cancer cells take up glucose for what reason?
energy

Birds and insects perform what function for flowering plants?
pollination

Most carcinogens produce mutations in genes that control what?
cell cycle

What type of equations allows calculation of the wavelength of any moving object?
debroglie wave

Each new horizontal row of the periodic table corresponds to the beginning of a new period because a new principal energy level is being filled with what?
electrons

What kind of energy is specifically defined as the energy that is available to do work?
free

Only a small percent of earth's water is what type, as opposed to saltwater?
fresh

The kidneys work with the urinary system to remove what?
wastes

What is asexual reproduction in which an egg develops without being fertilized called?
parthenogenesis

What does water vapor in the atmosphere cool and condense into?
clouds

Carbon-14 dating is a method of what kind of dating?
radiometric

Friendly bacteria live mostly in the large intestine and part of the small intestine, because what organ is too acidic?
stomach

The addition of heat changes liquid water to what?
water vapor

What is the most widely accepted theory explaining how muscle fibers contract?
sliding filament theory

Power in electricity is the voltage multiplied by what?
the current

What are the vertical columns of similar chemical properties on the periodic table?
groups

What forms the changing shapes of sand dunes?
wind

What is the process in which one cell divides to form two new cells called?
cell division

What reaction is considered the reverse of photosynthesis?
cellular respiration

What are composed of an oxygen atom that forms single bonds with two carbon atoms?
ethers

Where do cells come from?
preexisting cells

What are the female gametes that form in the ovaries?
eggs

What are plants in the diploid generation called?
sporophytes

Through what do moving particles transfer thermal energy?
fluid

What is the name for the water-splitting step of photosynthesis?
photolysis

The entropy change is positive as the solid state changes into which state?
liquid

The process when heat is released is referred to as what?
exothermic

What is a large space that helps the organism digest & move nutrients around the cnidarian body?
gastrovascular cavity

An infection of the brain is called?
encephalitis

The converging of continental plates can form what kind of geological feature?
mountains

Mammals generally lack a cloaca and have a separate opening for the what?
digestive tract

Chordates are defined by a set of four characteristics that are shared by these animals at some point during their?
development

What is produced during the light reactions in photosynthesis?
oxygen

Nerves of the hands, arms, feet, legs, and trunk are part of what system?
peripheral nervous system

Generally, momentum implies a tendency to continue on course—to move in the same direction—and is associated with great mass and speed. momentum, like energy, is important because it is what?
conserved

Which types of muscles cause bones to move when they retract?
skeletal muscles

Which is the final step of cell division?
cytokinesis

What are xylem and phloem responsible for transporting to the cells of leaves?
water and minerals

What kind of cell is a cell with two chromosomes?
diploid cell

Which term literally means 'spore in a vessel'?
sporangia

Human culture is related to evolutionary theory in the discipline of what?
sociobiology

Which forces hold particles together in more ordered states?
intermolecular

What is the movement of muscle in the digestive system called?
peristalsis

Smoking increases the risk of cancer from what radioactive gas that can also be detected with a test kit for your home?
radon

What is the main function of the cardiovascular system?
to transport

When something is described as "hydrophilic", you can determine something about how it interacts with what?
water

What human traits are controlled by more than one gene?
polygenic traits

Most chromosomal disorders involve which chromosomes?
sex chromosomes

Carbonic anhydrase plays what role to achieve a variety of results involving different organs?
enzyme

What is it called when minerals replace the organic material to create fossils?
permineralization

Smaller sized galaxies are known as what?
dwarf galaxies

What is the name of the supportive structed that helps move a worm's muscles?
hydroskeleton

What type of transport occurs when substances cross the plasma membrane without any input of energy from the cell?
passive transport

A mold is an imprint of an organism left in what?
rock

Particles of different densities exert different amounts of what?
pressure

Plants generally transport carbohydrates from leaves to roots and other nonphotosynthetic organs in the form of what?
sucrose

Monocots and eudicots differ in what type of a leaf's tissue?
vascular

What kind of reproduction, in general, relies on sets of cells that are precursors for eggs and sperm?
sexual

A lens of what shape causes rays of light to diverge, or spread apart, as they pass through it?
concave

What is the complex network of nervous tissue that carries electrical messages throughout the body?
nervous system

Crowding and resource limitation can have a profound effect on the rate of what?
population growth

X and y are the labels of what specialized human chromosomes?
sex chromosomes

Isotopes are named for their number of ______ plus neutrons?
protons

Because fungi feed on decaying and dead matter, they play what important role by releasing essential elements into the environment?
decomposers

If the temperature of a gas sample is decreased, what happens to the volume?
decreases

Most food chains and webs have a maximum of how many trophic levels?
4

What refers to the development and nourishment of an embryo within the mother’s body but not inside an egg?
vivipary

What kind of anaerobe is yeast?
facultative

Bones are far from static, or unchanging. instead, they are what?
dynamic

After entering the circulation, approximately one-third of platelets migrate to what organ for storage, to be released in response to any blood vessel rupture?
spleen

What causes a small scrap of paper placed on top of the water droplet to float , although the object is denser (heavier) than the water?
surface tension

What is the term for a structure composed of more than one type of tissue?
organ

What is the pair of bean-shaped organs situated just above the waist?
kidneys

What part of a bird is adapted for the food it eats?
beak

What is the inner cell mass formed by the cells of the blastocyst called?
embryoblast

What does the distribution of darts on a dartboard shows the difference between?
accuracy and precision

What gas do the lungs give up as they take in oxygen?
carbon dioxide

What is the term for the last stage of life before adulthood?
adolescence

Breaking of weak bonds, which tend to form between positive and negative charges, does not require much what?
energy

What two organs secrete fluids that aid in digestion?
pancreas and liver

When light meets matter, it may be reflected, transmitted, or what?
absorbed

When a sperm penetrates the egg, it triggers the egg to complete what?
meiosis

What chromosome determines the sex of an organism?
sex chromosome

In contrast to precision, this term means how close a measurement is to the correct or accepted value of the quantity being measured?
accuracy

Where is most of the cell's dna contained?
nucleus

The four major classes of biological macromolecules include carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and what else?
nucleic acids

What protects you from pathogens and keeps you healthy?
immune system

Although they differ vastly in hardness, pencil lead and diamonds both contain what element?
carbon

The majority of salamanders lack what organs, so respiration occurs through the skin or through external gills?
lungs

Crabs, lobsters, shrimp, krill, and woodlice are all?
crustaceans

What makes water change to a different state?
temperature

What is a hydrocarbon in which there are only single covalent bonds?
alkane

What is the measure of the amount of space occupied by an object?
volume

The energy that enters the chloroplasts as sunlight becomes stored as what type of energy in organic compounds?
chemical energy

Whose rules are too simple to explain the inheritance of human height?
mendel

The fertilized egg that sexually reproducing organisms begin life as is known as what?
zygote

People with red hair usually have what type of skin?
light

What provides the shape of a cell?
cytoskeleton

Competition between members of the same species is known as?
intraspecific competition

One molecule of carbon dioxide consists of 1 atom of carbon and 2 atoms of what element?
oxygen

What facilitates the diffusion of ions across a membrane?
ion channels

What kind of fibers are used to transport telephone and television signals?
optical fibers

In what century was the microscope invented?
17th

What do the hair cells in the cochlea release when they bend?
neurotransmitters

Receptor clustering happens when what binds to the receptors?
fas molecules

What makes toenails and fingernails hard?
keratin

Producing sperm and secreting testosterone are the main functions of what system?
male reproductive system

Biochemistry is the study of the chemistry of?
living systems

Color, temperature, and solubility are examples of what type of property?
intensive

What is the term for nutrients the body needs in relatively small amounts, including vitamins and minerals?
micronutrients

What do corals secrete that builds up to become a coral reef?
exoskeletons

Solid balls of water and dust falling from the sky are known as?
hail

What brain structure is important in recognizing and recalling emotions?
amygdala

Oils are liquid lipids that plants use for storage of what?
energy

Where do the majority of arthropods live?
on land

Protein chains containing 10 or fewer amino acids are usually referred to as what?
peptides

The primary site of carbohydrate digestion is in the?
small intestine

A potential cause of extinction, competition between different species is called what?
interspecific competition

Within the microsporangium, the microspore mother cell divides by meiosis to give rise to four microspores, each of which will ultimately form this?
pollen grain

What is regulated by the reticular formation?
wakefulness

All living things are capable of what process whereby living things give rise to offspring?
reproduction

What is the common name of mixtures of hydrocarbons that formed over millions of years from the remains of dead organisms?
fossil fuels

What branch of science is the study of the universe, not of cosmetics?
cosmology

Which blood leaves the placenta through veins leading back to the fetus?
fetal

Matter can be classified on the basis of how what interacts with it?
light

What scale is used to succinctly communicate the acidity or basicity of a solution?
ph

Hormones often regulate what through antagonistic functions?
homeostasis

The potential of what can be used to measure the ph of a solution?
galvanic cell

What theory says atoms of matter are in constant random motion?
modern kinetic theory

The laws of what field of science apply to galaxies and atoms, an indication of the underlying unity in the universe?
physics

What makes soil and rock particles move gradually down the slope during each thaw?
gravity

What is the protist kingdom sometimes called as?
trash can kingdom

The constant "c" can be specifically used to represent the (extremely fast) speed of what?
light

What are non-renewable sources of energy that produce environmental damage?
fossil fuels

What causes cancer cells to avoid elimination and continue to multiply?
uncontrolled cell division

Electronegativity is a qualitative measure of how much an atom attracts what in a covalent bond?
electrons

Depending on how matter interacts with light, it can be classified as transparent, translucent, or what?
opaque

Kidneys, large intestine, liver, skin, and lungs comprise which system?
excretory system

What group of single-celled organisms lacking a nucleus comprises the most numerous organisms on earth?
prokaryotes

Diamond, graphite and fullerene are examples of what form of carbon?
crystalline

A hot-water heating system uses what type of energy to heat water?
thermal energy

What captures carbon dioxide as it is emitted by a power plant before it enters the atmosphere?
carbon sequestration

What type of oil is being explored to replace petroleum products in lubricants?
vegetable

What advantage equals the distance of effort divided by the distance the object moves and is also equal to the output force divided by the input force?
mechanical

What is the outer layer of skin, consisting almost entirely of epithelial cells?
epidermis

What is the accumulated total of all the biochemical reactions occurring in a cell or organism called?
metabolism

When fertilizer ends up in bodies of water, the added nutrients cause excessive growth referred to as what, which can render the water unfit for human consumption or recreation?
algal bloom

What part of the cell controls what enters and leaves?
membrane

Where does the development of a fetus take place?
the female reproductive system

What is the critical factor for the survival of segmented worms?
water and humidity

During sexual arousal what does the clitoris, vagina, and labia minora all engorge with?
blood

What is another term for joules per second?
watts

What is extracted from rock by heap leaching, flotation, or smelting?
ore

What tool is useful for studying the ocean floor because the environment is remote and underwater?
sonar

What is the functional unit of the kidney which actively filters blood and generates urine?
nephron

Name two candidates for the original sources of viral genomes.
plasmids and transposons

What do you call a substance that is not an acid or a base?
neutral

An amide bond joining two amino acid units is called a what?
peptide bond

What is the name for spherical groups of old stars held tightly together by gravity?
globular clusters

What type of state do most fungi spend their lives in?
haploid

What is the white solid that forms on corroded battery terminals?
lead sulfate

What does the decomposition of dead organisms and organic waste release into the atmosphere, soil, or ocean?
carbon

In which process do two light nuclei combine to produce a heavier nucleus and great energy?
nuclear fusion

What results from the consumption of pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or parasites that contaminate food?
foodborne diseases

What type of physical properties of a substance do not depend on amount?
intensive

A wave that consists of vibrating electric and magnetic fields is called what?
electromagnetic wave

Both endocytosis and ______ are active transport processes.
exocytosis

What type of roads and parking lots prevent rainwater from soaking into the ground?
paved

What type of acid is often used as a preservative for acidic foods such as fruit juices?
benzoic acid

Vascular plants evolved what basic structures to collect sunlight?
leaves

The entropy is decreasing because a gas is becoming a what?
liquid

Sucrose does not undergo reactions that are typical of aldehydes and ketones, therefore it is a nonreducing what?
sugar

An electric stove changes electric current to what form of energy?
thermal

Mammals are endothermic vertebrates that have four limbs and produce what type of eggs?
amniotic

Which group of metals in the periodic table include elements such as sodium and potassium?
alkali metals

What is the term for force that opposes motion between any touching surfaces?
friction

Most animals are in which clade?
bilateria

What system carries nerve impulses to internal organs, controlling activities that are not under your control, such as sweating and digesting food?
autonomic nervous system

What are invertebrate chordates that retain all four defining chordate traits as adults called?
lancelets

What has traditionally been defined as a force of attraction between two masses?
gravity

What members of an ecosystem food chain take in food by eating producers or other living things?
consumers

What are small organelles and are the site of protein synthesis?
ribosomes

Lungs, pharynx, larynx, trachea, and bronchi are part of which system?
respiratory

What is necessary for growth and energy?
nutrients

Bryophyta is the formal taxonomic name for the phylum that consists solely of what?
mosses

In humans, how many chromosomes does each somatic cell have?
46

Like mitochondria, plastids contain their own what?
dna

Terrestrial and aquatic are the two basic categories of what, on earth?
biomes

When dissolved in water, what do strong acids transfer to the solvent completely?
acidic protons

On the atomic level, the dissolution of an ionic compound occurs when water interacts with the what in the crystal lattice?
ions

What is one method to observe nebulae?
telescope

When alternating primary current passes through coil p, it does what to the iron core?
magnetizes it

What state of matter exists if particles do not have enough kinetic energy to overcome the force of attraction between them?
solid

What is the“packet” of energy called that the nucleus emits during gamma decay?
gamma particle

The movement of molten metal in earth's outer core creates?
the magnetic field

Mechanical churning of food in what organ serves to further break it apart and expose more of its surface area to digestive juices, creating an acidic “soup” called chyme?
stomach

A constant and plentiful supply of oxygen is required in order to maintain a high rate of what?
metabolism

Organisms interact with each other and what else?
physical environment

What is the center of an earthquake called?
the epicenter

Calvin cycle reactions can be organized into three basic stages: fixation, reduction, and this?
regeneration

What type of cells are arranged into tightly packed sheaths around the veins of the leaf?
bundle-sheath cells

How are the number of moles of carbon dioxide gas calculated?
stoichiometry

What is the name of the blood protein that carries oxygen from the lungs to the body's assorted tissues?
hemoglobin

The sun and many other light sources produce waves that are randomly this?
polarized

Each vertebral vein also flows into which vein?
brachiocephalic

Almost all plants make food through what process?
photosynthesis

What did darwin call the evolutionary concept of change in populations over generations?
descent with modifications

Surprisingly, where would you find the earth’s tallest mountains and deepest canyons?
ocean floor

The part of the shadow in which light is completely blocked is called what?
umbra

What is the name of the period of transition between the beginning of puberty and adulthood?
adolescence

The formula unit of sodium chloride dissociates into one sodium ion and one?
chloride ion

Fibrous root systems have many small branching roots called what?
fibrous roots

A system of glands secretes what chemical messenger molecules into the blood?
hormones

In eukaryotic cells, molecules such as enzymes are usually compartmentalized into different what?
organelles

What does the stable form of sulfur at room temperature contain?
eight-membered rings

What term means the amount of a substance required to form a saturated solution in a given amount of solvent at a specified temperature?
solubility

What bone forms the upper jaw and supports the upper teeth?
maxillary bone

What does increasing a solute's temperature do?
increases its solubility

What are the pyramid-shaped, paired organs that are connected to the trachea by the right and left bronchi?
lungs

The global biosphere includes all areas of what?
life

Atomic orbitals from different atoms overlap to form what?
molecular orbitals

Particulates cause lung diseases. they can also increase the risk of heart disease and the number of what?
asthma attacks

What  reinforces the thin walls of the right ventricle and plays a crucial role in cardiac conduction?
moderator band

What kind of radiation is observed in honeycreeper birds?
adaptive

What do we call the worldwide radio-navigation system formed from a constellation of 24 satellites and their ground stations?
gps

What substance can be eroded by wind or water?
soil

What unit of the nervous system consists of a cell body, dendrites, and axon?
neuron

What are small planets in our solar system called?
dwarf planets

What is electrons in the highest occupied principal energy level of an atom called?
valence electrons

Pacemaker cells stimulate the spontaneous contraction of cardiac muscle as a functional unit, called a what?
syncytium

A mineral’s crystal shape is determined by the way what objects are arranged?
atoms

Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a what?
cell nucleus

What term is used to describe major changes in the genetic material?
chromosomal alterations

What type of rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together?
sedimentary rocks

Processes in which matter changes between liquid and solid states are freezing and?
melting

Abrasion is a process of what type of weathering?
mechanical

Mendel’s observation of pea plants also included many crosses that involved multiple traits, which prompted him to formulate the principle of this?
independent assortment

The skull consists of cranial bones and what other type of bones?
facial

Insects are arthropods in which class?
hexapoda

What is the tail bone an example of?
vestigial structure

What is the intersection point of the critical temperature and the critical pressure called?
critical point

Nuclear power plants produce electricity through what?
induced fission

When the body goes into survival mode, it's first priority is to produce enough of which substance for the brain?
glucose

What do we consider the basic building blocks of life?
cells

Which law describes the angle at which the reflected rays leave the surface is equal to the angle at which the incident rays strike the surface?
reflection

What major pigment in the photosynthetic system is based on a complex molecule and gives plants their green color?
chlorophyll

If heat is released by the system into the surroundings, a chemical reaction or physical change is called what?
exothermic

A hydrostatic skeleton is a skeleton formed by a fluid-filled compartment within the body, called what?
coelom

Sharks are an example of an animal with sharp vision that is nonetheless unable to distinguish what?
color

What performance-enhancing drugs are synthetic versions of the male sex hormone, testosterone?
anabolic steroids

What bonds cause water to have a high boiling point, leaving most water on earth in a liquid state rather than in a gaseous state?
hydrogen bonds

Each root is made of dermal, ground, and what type of tissue?
vascular

What is the measure of the change in velocity of a moving object called?
acceleration

What is the name for medical doctors that specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the heart?
cardiologists

Any place at which two bones are joined is called a what?
articulation

In mammals, hair or fur help conserve bodily what?
heat

Echinoderms are marine organisms that make up which phylum?
echinodermata

What kind of membrane do prokaryotic cells have?
plasma membrane

What is the name of the cell that results when a sperm nucleus fuses with a egg nucleus?
a zygote

What makes a complete orbit around the earth once every 29 1/2 days?
the moon

What general property of an earthquake is used to describe its relative strength?
magnitude

What is a three dimensional snycline?
a basin

Rather than being dead, dry, and brittle, what support structures of the human body consist of living tissues and are supplied with blood and nerves?
bones

The entire range of light that can be seen by the human eye without aid is known as what kind of light?
visible light

An endocrine disease usually involves the secretion of too much or not enough hormone by which gland?
endocrine

What are the four well-known states of matter?
solid, liquid, gas, and plasma

What is the term for plants that produce flowers and fruit?
angiosperms

Why did people stop adding lead to gasoline?
environmental pollution

Osseous tissue is the tissue that makes up what?
bone

What is the initial stage of  scienetific investigations?
observation

The radiation exposure is determined by the number of what times the quality factor of the radiation?
rads

What is the smallest class of elements?
metalloids

What is friction that acts on objects that are moving through a fluid?
fluid friction

The sun’s gravity is relatively strong because the force of gravity between two objects is directly proportional to their what?
masses

What do aquatic arthropods use to exchange gases with the water?
gills

How many groups of leaves does poison ivy typically have?
three

This knocks electrons from atoms and turns them into ions?
radiation

What do you call an incomplete outer shell of an atom?
valence shell

What are the specialized cells of sponges called?
collar cells

What organ system is comprised of your heart, blood, and blood vessels all working together?
cardiovascular system

What type of cells capture light energy, and use carbon dioxide as their carbon source?
photoautotrophs

When drinking water is treated, what is the term for when chemicals cause solids in the water to clump together?
coagulation

What does the urea cycle process?
nitrogen

When using a microscope we do not see the entire extent of the sample. depending on the eyepiece and objective lens we see a restricted region which we say is this?
field of view

Sickle cell diseas is caused by what?
receccisve allele

What are the most successful organisms on earth?
bacteria

The temperature of an object is a measure of what type of energy?
thermal

The chromosomal theory of inheritance proposed that what reside on chromosomes?
genes

What process occurs around day 14 of a 28-day menstrual cycle, triggered by the lh surge?
ovulation

What term refers to a change in species over time?
evolution

The nitrogen cycle moves nitrogen back and forth between the atmosphere and what?
organisms

Eutrophication, or high levels of nutrients, can cause conditions that deprive fish of what vital gas?
oxygen

What ancestors did caecillians evolve from?
tetrapod

The surfaces of the bones at the joints are covered with a smooth layer of cartilage, which reduces what force between the bones when they move?
friction

The infection-fighting complement system consists of roughly 30 proteins in?
blood plasma

In how many ways ca a living organism obtain chemical energy
two

What stage in human males lasts from about ages 12 to 18 years and is controlled by hormones?
puberty

Elasticity is the ability of a material to return to its original shape after being stretched or?
compressed

Many parasites have complex life cycles involving multiple ?
hosts

What type of light is composed of many rays having random polarization directions?
unpolarized light

How do yeasts reproduce?
asexually

In science, what can be described as a set of steps that help us to answer questions?
scientific method

What does the body derive from the breakdown of the carbohydrate-containing foods and drinks we consume?
glucose

A mitotic spindle forms from the centrioles and passes through the nuclear membrane, which remains intact. chromosomes attach to the mitotic spindle, which separates the chromosomes and does what?
elongates the cell

Substances produced by a reaction are known as?
products

What happens to the core of a star when it begins to run low on hydrogen?
it contracts

What occurs when air masses meet?
fronts

What's the name for a cluster of genes, where one promoter serves adjacent genes?
opteron

The diversity of alleles and genotypes within a population is known as genetic what?
variance

What does temperature measure?
average kinetic energy of molecules

What is the term for when the water of the ocean slowly rises and falls?
tides

Female monotremes lack a uterus and vagina. instead they have what?
cloaca

Pigments are substances that absorb what?
visible light

What class of oxygencontaining compounds is formed by the dehydration of alcohols?
ethers

Group 16 is called the oxygen group. what is the only metalloid in this group?
tellurium

In his work with pea plants, mendel performed what, which involves mating two true-breeding individuals that have different traits?
hybridization

What type of minerals form when salt water evaporates?
halide

What are identified by the azimuthal quantum number?
sub-energy levels

Desert plants have special stems and leaves to conserve what?
water

What substance causes oxidation by accepting electrons?
oxidizing agent

Angiosperm success is a result of two novel structures that ensure reproductive success: flowers and this?
fruit

Squamata is the largest order of what broad animal group, and includes lizards and snakes?
reptiles

Animals that have been modified to express recombinant dna are called what?
transgenic animals

In a medium, the closer the distribution of the material gets to what state, the slower the rate of diffusion becomes?
equilibrium

When substances pass through the cell membrane without needing any energy what is it called?
passive transport

Elements that do not need to conduct electricity are known as what?
nonmetals

What does the moon not have to protect it from extreme temperatures?
atmosphere

What happens between particles with opposite charges?
they attract

Which generation of a plant is generally larger and longer-lived?
dominant generation

Mammals belong to which class of vertebrates?
endothermic

Animals that have feeding patterns that are somewhere between that of herbivores and carnivores can be called what?
omnivores

What organs produce eggs?
ovaries

What kind of reaction adds water to an organic molecule and breaks the large molecule into smaller molecules?
hydration reaction

How much larger can the most powerful light microscropes make an image?
2000 times

In mammals, air is warmed and humidified in what?
nasal cavity

What is the specialized tissue that transports water and nutrients throughout the plant and allows these plants to grow taller?
vascular tissue

What is the term for the method of sending out ultrasound waves to determine the locations of objects?
echolocation

In autosomal dominant inheritance only one "affected" what is necessary to result in an "affected" phenotype?
allele

When the nucleus divides, the two chromatids that make up each chromosome separate from each other and move to opposite poles of the cell during this process?
mitosis

What is the layer above the troposphere?
stratosphere

Which system consists of organs that break down food and absorb nutrients such as glucose?
digestive system

What part of the eye controls the size of the pupil?
iris

Depending on a tumor’s location, for example, cancer surgeons may be unable to remove it. radiation and chemotherapy are difficult, and it is often impossible to target only the cancer cells. the treatments inevitably destroy this?
healthy cells

Sodium is an example of what sort of thing that cannot exist by itself in nature?
element

What type of resource is water power?
renewable

Which part of the plant is responsible for seed production?
flower

The two main agents of soil erosion are water and what else?
wind

What do aggregate fruits like raspberries form from?
carpels fused together

What kind of ions are named by adding the suffix -ide to the end?
negative ions

These resources can be remade quickly, through natural processes
renewable

Inorganic chemical compounds can be broadly classified into two groups: ionic compounds and which other group?
molecular compounds

Fish are a diverse and interesting group of organisms in what sub-phylum?
vertebrates

Spinal cord injuries are notoriously difficult to treat because spinal nerves do not do what?
regenerate

The ratio of displacement to time interval is the average what?
velocity

What is the modern periodic table based on?
atomic number

The needle of a compass is made of what element?
iron

What is the process in which the genetic code in mrna is read to make a protein called?
translation

What type of protein speeds up chemical reactions in cells?
enzyme

In what part of the lungs is pulmonary gas exchanged?
alveoli

What phenomenon occurs when strong winds blow surface water away from shore, allowing deeper water to flow to the surface and take its place?
upwelling

When does the nucleus divide?
mitosis

Olfactory, optic, and vestibulocochlear nerves are related to what type of function?
sensory

What happens when alkanes are mixed with oxygen at room temperature?
no reaction

At the bottom of lakes and ponds, bacteria in what zone break down dead organisms that sink there?
aphotic zone

What is the name for a heterotroph that eats only or mainly animal foods?
carnivore

What is the name of an extreme form of radiation fog?
tule fog

In what form is most of the earth's freshwater?
frozen

What cells do lymphocytes originate from in the bone marrow?
stem cells

What is the common name for a simple harmonic oscillator, which basically consists of a small object suspended on a wire or string?
pendulum

What kind of process occurs without the need for a continual input of energy from some external source?
spontaneous process

What are fungus-like protists?
molds

Electrons exist only where the wave is what?
stable

What are the simplest hydrocarbons?
saturated hydrocarbons

The shield type of what phenomenon commonly forms above hotspots in the oceans?
volcano

Bromide is present in brines, which are naturally occurring solutions of what?
salt

What shape are the eight sides of an octahedra?
triangles

Unlike an adult sponge, what stage is motile due to cilia that propel it through water?
larva

What weather phenomenon, which may bring clouds and precipitation, is created by stalled air masses?
stationary front

What keeps glaciers from forming in water?
warmth

The human skeleton is an endoskeleton that consists of 206 bones in the adult. it has five main functions: providing support to the body, storing minerals and lipids, producing blood cells, protecting internal organs, and  this?
allowing movement

What's the name for the process where pollen is transferred to the ovules of a seed plant?
pollination

At what time of the year can tornadoes occur?
any

How is sediment transported?
currents

Where are all hormones secreted into before entering the circulatory system?
interstitial fluid

Vertebrates have tissues which are organized into organs which in turn are organized into  what?
organ systems

What can renewable resources can be replaced by?
natural processes

When warm air rises up to the tropopause, where does it flow?
north or south

What kind of messages do neurons send?
electrical messages

What forces in liquids are strong enough to keep them from expanding significantly when heated?
intermolecular forces

Which chromosome is associated with cri du chat syndrome?
chromosome 5

The strong affinity of concentrated sulfuric acid for water makes it a good agent of what?
dehydrating

Where in the female body does egg production take place?
ovaries

What is the amorphous form of carbon prepared by the incomplete combustion of natural gas?
carbon black

What do gametes undergo to produce many additional copies of themselves?
mitosis

The greenhouse effect on earth is caused by an increase in what in the atmosphere?
carbon

What is the term for the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1 degree celsius?
specific heat capacity

In animals, how many sets of chromosomes do gametes have?
one

What scale measures acidity?
ph scale

What is sulfur trioxide dissolved in to form sulfuric acid?
water

Mendelian inheritance has its physical basis in the behavior of what?
chromosomes

The parasympathetic system can also be referred to as the what?
craniosacral system

Negative feedback controls insulin secretion by what organ?
pancreas

In the past, what colliding with planet earth has caused many organisms to die off?
asteroids

The number, size, shape, and banding pattern of chromosomes make them easily identifiable in a what?
karyogram

What are the egg shaped organs on either side of the uterus?
ovaries

A voltaic cell uses what type of reaction to generate an electric current
spontaneous redox

Binary compounds of carbon with less electronegative elements are called what?
carbides

What makes viral stis more dangerous than other types?
they are incurable

What flows like taffy or hot wax?
molten rock

What unit of measurement determines how far something travels in a given amount of time?
speed

What happens do the sound during a resonance?
amplified, it becomes louder

With a diet of live animals such as birds, small mammals and fish, all crocodilians are considered what?
carnivores

Which types of compounds are more likely to burn easily?
covalent

Which of newton's law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration?
second

Which proteins recognize and combine with harmful materials, including both toxic chemicals and invasive microorganisms?
antibodies

What type of behavioral rhythms are linked to the yearly cycle of seasons?
circannual

What type of scientist uses earth-orbiting telescopes?
astronomer

Sponges possess an internal skeleton called what?
endoskeleton

A fundamental particle of matter, protons and neutrons are made of these?
quarks

What is the name of the smaller molecules that make up proteins?
amino acids

What is the term for a state of matter that yields to sideways or shearing forces?
fluid

Many structures in fish are adaptations for what type of lifestyle?
aquatic

What takes place at some coastlines or along the equator and brings cool, nutrient-rich water to the surface?
upwelling

The major classes of living members of this phylum include gastropods, bivalves, and cephalopods?
mollusks

What is the thin coat of phospholipids that surrounds the cell and controls what enters and leaves?
cell membrane

Because conditions are not ideal, most populations grow ____________.
logistically

Besides the inner membrane, where are many respiratory enzymes found?
the matrix

The most common elements have the most tightly bound __________.
nuclei

What are particles that feel the strong nuclear force called?
hadrons

Aquatic producers need nutrients and what dissolved gas, which is more abundant near the surface of water?
oxygen

All elements are most stable when their outermost shell is filled with electrons according to which rule?
octet rule

What do you need to do to water to make it steam?
heat it

When scientists work in natural settings rather than a lab, it is called what?
fieldwork

What is released into the atmosphere when fossil fuels are burned?
carbon dioxide

The leaf chameleon (brookesia micra) was discovered in northern madagascar in 2012. at just over one inch long, it is what?
smallest known chameleon

Water and many metals are materials that have low resistance to electric currents and are therefore known as what?
electric conductors

What is the name of the science that is concerned with naming and grouping organisms?
taxonomy

What substance can be identified by their atomic number and mass number?
elements

What do you call the first cell of a new organism?
zygote

What planet in our solar system has a moon with volcanic activity?
jupiter

Kangaroos, koalas, and opossums are examples of what type of mammals?
marsupials

Fe for iron and pb for lead are examples of elements known since ancient times, which have symbols based on their name in what language?
latin

Referring to low what, hypovolemia may be caused by bleeding, dehydration, vomiting, severe burns, or some medications used to treat hypertension?
blood volume

What particles allow fungi to reproduce through unfavorable conditions?
spores

What is the term for an underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater?
aquifer

Where do most ecosystems get energy from?
sunlight

Maintaining a high metabolic rate takes a lot of what?
energy

Electrons can move from one atom to another; when they do, specimens called what, with overall electric charges, are formed?
ions

Energy is absorbed as reactants are converted to products in what kind of chemical reaction?
endothermic

What is the permanent prevention of gamete production or release called?
sterilization

Because pathogenic bacteria typically cause disease by releasing exotoxins or endotoxins, they have potential use as what type of weapon?
bioterrorism

What cycle vital to plants includes a process called denitrification?
nitrogen cycle

Cerebral palsy is a disease caused by injury to what organ as it is developing?
brain

What substance is removed from waste as it passes through the large intestine?
water

The distance between two consecutive z discs or z lines is called what?
sarcomere

What is the largest taxonomic rank?
domain

Which system is divided into the somatic and autonomic nervous systems?
peripheral nervous system

The composition of the magma determines if the rock is mafic, felsic, or what?
intermediate

The shape of the path of an object undergoing projectile motion is called?
a parabola

What type of animals breathe with gills as larvae and with lungs as adults?
amphibians

The most abundant formed elements in blood, erythrocytes are red, biconcave disks packed with an oxygen-carrying compound called this?
hemoglobin

What is the scale on which acidity is measured?
ph

Almost all fungi reproduce asexually by producing what?
spores

Thomson’s plum pudding model shows the structure of what?
atom

What type of carbons may be gases, liquids, or solids at room temperature?
hydrocarbons

What diagnostic technology uses high-frequency vibrations transmitted into any tissue in contact with the transducer?
ultrasound

At what time of life does menopause occur?
in middle adulthood

What type of current carries warm air from surrounding rocks to an animal's body?
convection

What quality of sound makes a tuba and a piccolo very different to a listener?
pitch

Where is the food supply and embryo stored in a seed?
hull

Most arthropods are insects. the phylum also includes spiders, centipedes, and what?
crustaceans

A cartilaginous joint where the bones are joined by fibrocartilage is called a what?
symphysis

The horizontal stems on strawberry plants are called what?
stolons

What are the newest, outer layers of secondary xylem called?
sapwood

Most amphibians breathe with these as larvae?
gills

Defined as a substance in foods and beverages that is essential to human survival, what term encompasses water, energy-yielding and body-building substances, and vitamins and minerals?
nutrients

Genetic disorders are diseases caused by what?
mutations

Transgenic animals are animals that have incorporated a gene from another species into their what?
genome

What structure of a cell is enclosed by a membrane and contains most of the cell’s dna?
nucleus

Does air temperature increase or decrease as it rises higher in the atmosphere?
decrease

During what do homologous chromosomes separate and go to different daughter cells?
meiosis

The light reactions take place in which membranes?
the thylakoid

Fossils themselves and the order in which they appear in are generally collectively called what?
fossil record

Hormones send what through your body?
signals

What does the armor including spines in some species offer?
protection from predators

Individual nucleotides can be linked together through their phosphate groups to form?
nucleic acid polymers

The name silicon is derived from the latin word for flint?
silex

What two types of juices help digestion within the small intestine?
intestinal and pancreatic

Cells in a biofilm secrete what to recruit nearby cells?
signaling molecules

A standing wave is created when what type of wave interferes with the original wave?
reflected wave

The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped structures that are located just below and posterior to the liver in this?
peritoneal cavity

What term means anything that is detected either through human senses or with instruments and measuring devices that extend human senses?
observation

The white fluffy part of popcorn is also what?
endosperm

What change can you expect in vectors that are perpendicular to each other?
no effect

Where is roughage fermented and digested in pseudo-ruminants?
in their cecum

How quickly a population changes in size over time is known as what?
population growth rate

Electromagnetic waves transfer energy across space as well as through what?
matter

What is the term for abnormally low blood levels of carbon dioxide?
hypocapnia

The vivid colors of flowers are an adaptation designed to encourage what by animals such as insects and birds?
pollination

Arthropods change into the adult form in a process called what?
metamorphosis

What is the largest part of the brain?
cerebrum

What type of weathering breaks rock into smaller pieces?
mechanical weathering

The coordination sphere consists of the central metal ion or atom plus its attached what?
ligands

What functions like a flexible coat of armor, preventing the protist from being torn or pierced without compromising its range of motion?
pellicle

The marine west coast climate gets lots of rain because of what being nearby?
the ocean

What determines whether a volcanic eruption will be explosive or not?
thickness of magma

Platinum and gold are useful materials for constructing circuits because of their ability to resist what?
oxidation

How many set of chromosomes do moss have?
single set

When you change a magnetic field through electromagnetic induction what do you create?
electric current

Morphological and molecular data indicate that wings evolved how many times in insects?
once

Nonmetal structures contain what type of bonds?
covalent

Gas lines should be made of what so they do not rupture?
flexible material

What is the lipid-rich sheath that surrounds the axon and facilitates the transmission of electrical signals along the axon?
myelin sheath

Where is urine formed in the body?
the kidneys

What is the term for rain consisting of water with a ph below 5?
acid rain

What type of ecosystem do polar bears live in?
arctic

Pseudopods are false what?
feet

Ionic bonds are what kind of attraction between ions?
electrostatic

What type of change occurs when matter changes chemically into an entirely different substance with different chemical properties?
chemical

Australia is home to many endemic species. the (a) wallaby (wallabia bicolor), a medium-sized member of the kangaroo family, is a pouched mammal, or this?
marsupial

What do you call structures like a whale's pelvic bones, which were once attached to legs, or wings that cannot be used for flight?
vestigial

What type of hybridization does ammonia undergo?
sp 3 hybridization

What does increased temperature do to a substance's kinetic energy?
increases

What natural process is associated with the death of cells?
aging

What color and shape are cumulus clouds?
white and puffy

During the early paleozoic, the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere compared to today was?
much greater

Physical science is defined as the study of what?
matter & energy

What do you call the two ends of a magnet where the magnetic effect is strongest?
poles

The scale that is used to measure the loudness of sound measures their loudness in what?
decibels

What are located on either side of the pharynx in the throat?
tonsils

What kind of reproduction requires the fusion of male and female gametes?
sexual reproduction

Diseases of the lungs, bronchial tubes, trachea, nose, and throat affect what organ system?
respiratory

What factor other than genes is important in determining adult height?
nutrition

What does burning wood release into the atmosphere?
carbon dioxide

The largest region of each of the palatine bone is the what?
horizontal plate

What does viscosity do to liquids?
resistant to flowing

What system is involved in diseases that include type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis?
immune system

What are are organisms that feed on small pieces of organic matter?
deposit feeders

What process would be impossible without some variation in the inherited traits of organisms within a species?
natural selection

Monoecious flowers are also known as “perfect” flowers because they contain both types of what organ?
sex organ

Human beings depend on learned behaviors more than any other?
species

Oxygen, carbon, hydrogen and what other element make up approximately 96% of living matter?
nitrogen

What type electrical circuits have multiple paths the current may take?
parallel

Hydrophobic interactions arise because water molecules engage in what type of bonding with other water molecules?
hydrogen bonding

What is the second most common skin cancer?
squamous cell carcinoma

Species divergence often, but not always, occurs because of what type of barrier between species?
physical

The chytrids the only class in the phylum chytridiomycota is the chytridiomycetes. the chytrids are the simplest and most primitive eumycota, or true this?
fungi

Almost all vascular plants have mycorrhizae and rely on their fungal partners for what?
nutrients

What occurs when there is a sudden and large falling of rocks down a slope?
landslide

What are gymnosperms lacking compared to most angiosperms?
vessel elements

Calculations are described showing conversions between molar mass and what for gases?
density

What sudden ground movement is caused by the sudden release of the energy stored in rocks, which is transmitted in seismic waves?
earthquake

What is the name for the cooler, darker areas on the sun’s surface?
sunspots

Plants need sunlight for what process?
photosynthesis

The vast majority of what phenomena occurs along one of three types of plate boundaries?
earthquake

What weather events move with the prevailing winds and originate in the trade winds in the northern hemisphere?
hurricanes

What is the name for the male reproductive organs or gonads?
testes

What glands in the breast secrete milk?
mammary glands

Sutures, gomphoses, and syndesmoses are types of what, which are found where adjacent bones are strongly united by connective tissue?
fibrous joints

Heat, electricity, or light might provide what necessary input to the process of decomposition?
energy

What is made up of a watery substance called cytosol and contains other cell structures such as ribosomes?
cytoplasm

What type of energy is required in all chemical reactions?
activation

What type of image is formed when light rays diverge in front of a mirror?
virtual

What is the condition of a plant in which the fluid in a cell exerts a pressure against the cell wall?
turgor

What phenomenon, crucial for evolution, creates new genetic variation in a gene pool and is how all new alleles first arise?
mutation

What is the name of the stage of life when a child becomes sexually mature?
puberty

A man made lake is known as what?
resevoirs

Alchemy helped improve the study of metallurgy and the extraction of metals from what?
ores

What are the two types of vascular tissues?
xylem and phloem

The spinal cord develops, cells making up the wall of the neural tube proliferate and differentiate into what?
neurons and glia

Eventually the parent cell will pinch apart to form two identical types of what cells?
daughter cells

The body cells cannot use insulin properly in which type of diabetes?
type 2 diabetes

Birds belong to a group of diapsids called the what?
archosaurs

How many limbs to birds have?
four

Planes fly in what layer of the atmosphere because there is less friction and turbulence?
stratosphere

What is a group of similar ecosystems with the same general abiotic factors and primary producers?
biome

Interferons are produced in virally infected cells and cause them to secrete signals for surrounding cells to make what?
antiviral proteins

What slow process is required for formation of soil?
weathering

What is defined as superheated gas with a positive electrical charge?
plasma

Materials, such as iron, that exhibit strong magnetic effects are labeled what?
ferromagnetic

Like birds, most other reptiles excrete their nitrogenous wastes as what acid?
uric

The two main fundamental particles that make up neutrons are quarks and what else?
gluons

Birds have evolved a respiratory system that enables them to fly. flying is a high-energy process and requires a lot of this?
oxygen

Lysosomes have what type of enzymes that break down old molecules into parts that can be recycled?
digestive

The breasts contain what to give milk to feed a baby?
mammary glands

What form when water vapor condenses in the air around specs of matter?
clouds

All other forms of life, including plants and animals, are composed of what kind of cells?
eukaryotic

A mycorrhiza refers to what kind of relationship between a fungus and the roots of a plant?
symbiotic

What is earth's main source of energy?
the sun

Kirchhoff’s second rule (the loop rule) is an application of conservation of what?
energy

Evolution over a short period of time at the level of the population is called what?
microevolution

When water is heated by magma and makes it's way to the surface what is created?
geyser

The mechanical and digestive processes have one goal: to convert food into molecules small enough to be absorbed by the epithelial cells of what?
intestinal villi

Influenza virus is packaged in a viral envelope, which fuses with the what?
plasma membrane

A desert is a type of what community in an ecosystem?
biome

What are the two types of properties that matter has?
physical and chemical

What is the hormone produced in high-stress situations?
adrenalin

What type of reaction causes two substances to combine to make a single substance?
composition reaction

Hay fever is actually an allergy to what substance, vital to plant reproduction?
pollen

Endotherms are warmed mostly by heat generated by what?
metabolism

If a ball is released from rest when air resistance is negligible, velocity is seen to increase linearly, while what related property is a constant?
acceleration

What term is used to describe the ability of matter to burn?
flammability

What is the evolutionary history of group of related organisms
phylogeny

What forms a ketone when oxidized?
secondary alcohol

What is the energy that flows as a result of a difference in temperature?
heat

Exposure to toxins is most damaging during weeks 4 through 8 of the embryonic stage due to development of what during this period?
organs

What evolutionary process may affect the distribution of a polygenic trait?
natural selection

What type of force exists between two touching surfaces?
friction

A short reflex is completely what and only involves the local integration of sensory input with motor output?
peripheral

The urea cycle, a set of biochemical reactions that produces urea from ammonium ions to prevent toxicity, occurs to some extent in the kidney, but primarily in what organ?
liver

Cellular respiration is the reverse or opposite of what?
photosynthesis

What force pulls object downwards to the earth?
gravity

How does deeper material cause convection in the mantle?
rises then sinks

From what did the first proto-oncogenes arise?
viral infections

What material used for helium-filled balloons is dense, strong and opaque, with a high molecular mass that forms films that have many fewer pores than rubber?
mylar

What do erythrocytes carry and deliver to tissues in the body?
oxygen

How many neutrons do 99% of carbon atoms have?
six

What are the two metals within a battery called?
anode and a cathode

What is one thing that can not happen to energy?
it can not be destroyed

Where do most biochemical reactions take place?
within cells

The ends of linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of which enzyme?
telomerase

Through which process does water from the oceans enter the atmosphere?
evaporation

In what type of process does heat flow into its surroundings and cause an increase in kinetic energy?
exothermic process

Prokaryotic organisms, like bacteria, reproduce through what process, where they grow and divide in half?
binary fission

Displacement is a vector quantity, which means it has both direction and what else?
magnitude

Waste leaves the body in the form of what?
feces

What process can occur when atoms are exposed to high levels of radiation or when atoms transfer electrons to or from other atoms?
ionization

Who should an obese person with an eating disorder seek for help?
health professional

The period of life between the start of puberty and the beginning of adulthood is called?
adolescence

What element once commonly used in paint and gasoline has now been found to have dangerous effects?
lead

What can happen spontaneously or as a result of mutagens in the environment?
mutations

Abnormally high activity or low activity of the parathyroid gland can cause disorders related to levels of what bone mineral?
calcium

Unlike other tetrapod vertebrates (reptiles, birds, and mammals), amphibians do not produce what type of eggs?
amniotic

What is the name for an underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater?
aquifer

What are prepared by the oxidation of secondary alcohols?
ketones

Saturated and unsaturated are the two main kinds of what?
fats

Most reptiles lay what kind of eggs?
amniotic

Sulfur can combine with oxygen to produce what?
sulfur trioxide

The nitrogen that enters living systems by nitrogen fixation is successively converted from organic nitrogen back into nitrogen gas by what?
bacteria

What term describes the amount of solute in a given amount of solution?
concentration

Which process helps absorptive protists absorb food molecules across their cell membranes?
diffusion

When matter recycles and changes state what does it gain or lose by doing so?
energy

Where does oxygen enter the blood?
in the lungs

What kind of compounds change color when bases come into contact with them, so they can be used to detect bases?
indicators

Concentric circles that spread out through the water around the droplets are actually types of what moving through the water?
waves

The smallest units of matter that retain the unique properties of an element are known as what?
atoms

What is a process that changes some chemical substances into other chemical substances?
a chemical reaction

What type of lens and mirrors have a negative focal length?
diverging

What is the formation of organs from the germ layers called?
organogenesis

What must two nuclei do for fusion to occur?
collide

What determines the ability of soil particles to bind many nutrients?
surface charges

Enthalpy is a measure of the total energy of what kind of system?
thermodynamic

In eukaryotes, the new mrna is not yet ready for translation. it must go through more processing before it leaves where?
nucleus

What term describes the splitting of the nucleus of an atom into two smaller nuclei?
nuclear fission

What type of contamination causes almost 90% of diarrheal disease worldwide?
water supply contamination

Why is respiratory acidosis considered to be problematic?
excess co2 in blood

When light strikes rhodopsin, the g-protein transducin is activated, which in turn activates what?
phosphodiesterase

In what stage of photosynthesis does the calvin cycle occur?
second

All of the planets rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the sun, except for which one?
uranus

What is the process by which organisms change in small ways over time?
microevolution

What regulates the cell cycle only when they are tightly bound to cdks?
cyclins

Einstein developed a theory about how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and what else?
particle

What type of proteins are only temporarily associated with the membrane?
peripheral membrane proteins

Which organisms break down either organic or inorganic molecules to supply energy for the cell?
chemotrophic organisms

What are the things moving under the earth's mantle that move the crust?
plates

Although they look like big rocks, what structures that serve as habitats for many different types of ocean life are actually alive?
coral reefs

What type of reactions are chemical reactions that release energy?
exothermic reactions

Fossil fuels and coal are examples of what kind of resources?
nonrenewable

What type of compound contains atoms of two or more different elements in its ring structure?
heterocyclic

What is formed when atoms of different elements combine in a chemical reaction?
compounds

What type of electricity is formed when a negative charge builds up and are transferred?
static electricity

What important liquid is stored throughout the earth in the oceans, underground, and in ice?
water

What results when a warm air mass runs into a cold air mass?
warm front

Which type of double bond has a sigma bond and a pi bond?
carbon-oxygen bond

Has the average annual temperature on earth been rising or falling for the past 100 years?
rising

The majoirty of modern gymnosperms belong to what group, which includes pine trees?
conifers

A circuit must be what in order for electric devices such as light bulbs to work?
closed

What type of radiation from the sun reaches earth across space striking everything on earth’s surface?
electromagnetic

What happens if a catalyst runs out?
reaction slows

What type of mammals are humans?
placental mammals

The shape of the path of an object undergoing projectile motion in two dimensions is a what?
parabola

The earliest cells were called what?
prokaryotes

Protists are the simplest of what?
eukaryotes

The measure of magnetic fields is named after a serbian physicist. what is his name?
nikola tesla

Radon (rn) is a radioactive gas formed by the decay of naturally occurring uranium in rocks such as granite. it tends to collect in the basements of houses and poses a significant health risk if present in indoor air. many states now require that houses be tested for radon before they are what?
sold

What state of matter takes neither the shape nor the volume of its container?
solid

Force times distance is the equation for what?
work

What is the name for a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month on average?
menstrual cycle

What is the name of the iron-containing oxygen-transport protein in the red blood cells of all vertebrates?
hemoglobin

What is the active ingredient in household bleach?
chlorine

What are the membrane-bound organelles that are usually larger than vesicles and can have secretory, excretory, and storage functions?
vacuoles

What broad category of animals is primarily ectothermic and covered with scales that facilitate swimming?
fish

What has two chains of nucleotides, one more than rna?
dna

The axon terminates on muscle fibers at the neuromuscular junction. acetylcholine is released at this specialized synapse, which causes the muscle action potential to begin, following a large potential known as an end plate potential. when the lower motor neuron excites the muscle fiber, it contracts. all of this occurs in a fraction of a second, but this story is the basis of how this functions?
nervous system

Misconceptions about what theory contribute to the controversy that still surrounds this fundamental principle of biology?
theory of evolution

What device is used to stop a current in a circuit?
a switch

What oily substance prevents the hair and skin of living things from drying out?
sebum

What two types of communication do both humans and birds use primarily?
visual and auditory

Eggs are produced in what organs and, upon fertilization, develop in what other organ?
ovaries, uterus

The first line of defense includes mechanical, chemical, and which other barrier?
biological

What is another term for nearsightedness?
myopia

Because all animals require an external source of what, they are called heterotrophic?
food

What causes blue litmus to turn red?
acid

When fossil fuel is burned the chemical energy is converted into what?
thermal energy

What two activities are especially important when a number of local populations are linked, forming a metapopulation?
immigration and emigration

What is the physical environment in which a species lives and to which it has adapted?
habitat

What kind of tests may detect substances associated with particular disorders?
biochemical

Scientists think the solar system formed from a big cloud of gas and dust called what?
nebula

What are the largest phylum of the animal kingdom?
arthropods

What is the name for a material that prevents the transfer of heat energy?
thermal insulator

What is a rock exposed to if it's undergoing metamorphism?
heat and pressure

Water infiltrates the ground because soil and rock may have air spaces between the grains. these pores, or tiny holes, result in the rock's what?
porosity

Work is done only if a force is exerted in the direction of what?
motion

What is the smallest independently functioning unit of a living organism?
cell

All animals have specialized types of what basic structures, which can then do different jobs?
cells

What term describes the number of items in a given area or volume?
concentration

Birds are known for flying south in the winter to avoid what?
cold weather

The root system is usually anchored by one main root developed from what?
embryonic radicle

What type of learning is done from past experiences and reasoning?
insight learning

Where is the pituitary gland?
brain

Which fungi eaten by people all over the world?
mushrooms

The outermost layer of the leaf is the epidermis; it is present on both sides of the leaf and is called the upper and lower epidermis, respectively. botanists call the upper side the adaxial surface (or adaxis) and the lower side this?
abaxial surface (or abaxis)

A small quake preceding a large quake is called what?
foreshock

What do winter storms develop from at higher latitudes?
cyclones

What is the only substance on earth that is present in all three states of matter?
water

What is essential for forming new genes?
large mutations

What is fluid friction with air called?
air resistance

Plants produce their own sugars and other food molecules through what process?
photosynthesis

What do fission reactors use to slow down the neutrons?
moderator

What term is used to describe an unusual sound coming from the heart that is caused by the turbulent flow of blood?
murmur

Carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible in what type of fatty acids?
saturated

What kind of mouthparts do aphids have?
piercing-sucking mouthparts

Sounds, chemicals, and visual cues are examples of what between animals?
communication

What is pressure times area equal to?
force

What part of the kangaroo helps it balance when it leaps as well as when it sits?
the tail

What is the evolutionary history of a group of related organisms called?
phylogeny

What are specialized cells in the brain that monitor the concentration of solutes in the blood called?
osmoreceptors

Bones consist of four types of tissue, compact bone, spongy bone, bone marrow, and what?
periosteum

During adolescence, what causes most of the changes associated with puberty?
testosterone

What is essential for cellular respiration for all aerobic organisms?
oxygen

Breeding in birds occurs through an internal type of what process?
fertilization

In an endothermic reaction, what is absorbed by the reaction?
energy

What scientist and monk is best known for his experiments with pea plants?
gregor mendel

What are structures that protect the coast like barrier islands called?
breakwaters

What leads to multiple copies of a chromosomal region?
duplications (or amplifications )

The larger surface area of leaves allows them to capture more what?
sunlight

What is connected to, and dependent on, the gametophyte?
the sporophyte

After passing through capillaries and being filtered, clean blood leaves what organ through a vein?
kidney

What kind of medical intervention seeks to eradicate diseases like polio and measles?
vaccination

The ostrich, kiwi, rhea, cassowary, and moa are examples of what kind of birds?
flightless

What occurs when individuals of different species strive for a limited resource in the same area?
interspecific competition

Most fungi reproduce asexually by producing what?
spores

Alchemists, as early as the eighth century, knew nitric acid as aqua fortis, which means?
strong water

Particles of sand and what other substance are carried by longshore drift?
rock

Most reptiles reproduce sexually and have what type of fertilization?
internal

What is type of substance is formed when water vapor condenses or when ice melts?
liquid water

What occur because solid lithosphere travels on a round planet?
intraplate earthquakes

What is the unit of evolution?
population

The boiling points of liquid also correlate to the strength of which forces?
intermolecular

Vitamin d is made in the skin when it is exposed to what?
sunlight

Of the three basic types of radioactive emissions, what particle is the most penetrating?
gamma

Which ocean zone is the narrow strip along a coastline that is covered by water at high tide and exposed to air at low tide?
intertidal zone

Elongation is the addition of what to the mrna strand?
nucleotides

What is the distance north or south of the equator called?
latitude

The force exerted by a diving board is conservative, provided the internal friction is this?
negligible

Along with other elements, most ores are made of what?
metal

The bottoms—but not the tops—of the wave slow down because of what?
friction

Molecular geometry is the three-dimensional arrangement of atoms in a what?
molecule

What mineral is used to produce glass?
quartz

What is caused by atoms or ions when they share or transfer valance electrons?
force of attraction

Due to the time it takes for light to reach us, galaxies at the edge of the universe are distant in terms of space and what else?
time

Some membrane proteins that actively transport ions contribute to what?
membrane potential

In which human organ do the juveniles develop into sexually mature adults?
intestines

Both sexes of sockeye salmon turn red with green heads just prior to what?
spawning

While the numerical aperture can be used to compare resolutions of various objectives, it does not indicate how far the lens could be from the what?
specimen

Energy from the sun has a wide range of wavelengths.what is the total range of energy called?
electromagnetic spectrum

When something loses electrons, it must also?
gain electrons

Water and chemical elements that organisms need keep recycling through biogeochemical what?
cycles

What is the most abundant biochemical compound, making up the cell walls of plants?
cellulose

What organisms use cilia, pseudopods, or flagella to move?
protists

During which phase do sister chromatids separate and the centromeres divide?
anaphase

What term describes a type of redox reaction in which the same substance is both oxidized and reduced?
disproportion

Each organism inherits one of what item for each gene from each parent?
allele

What term is used to refer to the external female reproductive structures collectively?
vulva

Which state of matter has the lowest density?
gases

Skeletal, cardiac, and smooth are the three types of what cells and possess morphologies correlated with their functions?
muscle

What do glands in the skin produce to cool down the body?
sweat

The only obvious difference between boys and girls at birth is what type of organs?
reproductive

Mammals have a number of kinds of thermoreceptors, each specific for a particular what?
temperature range

With a shape that specially suits its function of sending nerve signals to other cells, the human nerve cell is an example of what?
specialization

What is defined as the mass per unit volume of a substance?
density

What reaction means, literally, “splitting with water"?
hydrolysis

Approximately how much larger is the radius of an atom than that of its nucleus?
10 times

What can be worn to protect hands and skin from harm?
gloves

What type of movements are produced when the angle between the bones of a joint changes?
angular

What senses the movement of liquid in ear canals?
hair cells

What part of the brain regulates certain hormones associated with reproduction during breeding seasons?
hypothalamus

What is any nonmetallic, inorganic solid that is strong enough for use in structural applications called?
ceramic

What is the outer layer of the sun made up of?
plasma

Viruses may damage or kill cells by causing the release of hydrolytic enzymes from where?
lysosomes

Species that have diverged from their common ancestors have greater differences in what?
dna sequence

In a fuel cell, energy is not stored; electrical energy is provided by what?
chemical reaction

What substance comes toward earth's crust through mantle plumes?
magma

A plant is composed of two main types of tissue: meristematic tissue and what other kind of tissue?
permanent tissue

The smallest and lightest alcohols (methanol, ethanol, propanol) are completely soluble in?
water

In which stage do chromosomes line up one on top of each other along the middle of the cell, similar to how they line up in mitosis?
metaphase ii

If the frequency of the electromagnetic wave is the same as the natural frequencies of the system, the transfer of what is much more efficient?
energy

When are nutrients absorbed into the body?
during digestion

What happens to the length of the days in the fall?
they get shorter

Of the nine classes of vertebrates, how many are fish?
five

After fertilization is complete, no other sperm can enter. the fertilized ovule forms the seed, whereas the tissues of the ovary become this?
fruit

What is a fluid-filled body cavity that is completely enclosed by mesoderm called?
coelom

Which is the least massive outer planet?
uranus

The nervous system is characterized by electrical signals that are sent from one area to another. whether those areas are close or very far apart, the signal must travel along this?
axon

What occurs when light reflects off a very smooth surface and forms a clear image?
regular reflection

The head of the sperm contains what, which holds the chromosomes?
nucleus

What system is responsible for defending your body against sickness?
immune system

What effect occurs when a few individuals start, or found, a new population?
founder

Each kidney is supplied by a renal artery and what else?
renal vein

What cell structures capture light energy from the sun and use it with water and carbon dioxide to produce sugars for food?
chloroplasts

What is released when catabolic pathways break down complex molecules?
energy

Mass and volume are examples of what kind of properties?
extensive properties

What technique is used by insects and birds to find food, mates, and safety from predators?
flying

What property of food is determined by burning the food and measuring the heat released?
calories

What simple machine works with a wheel and axle in a wheelbarrow?
lever

What type of joint has the greatest range of motion?
ball-and-socket

What  is the movement of molecules from an area of high concentration of the molecules to an area with a lower concentration?
diffusion

Light-weight air-filled bones and a large four-chambered heart helps a bird do what?
fly

The myod protein deserves its designation as a master regulatory what?
gene

When flagellated sperm must swim to the egg, sexual reproduction requires the presence of what substance?
water

What consists of these five stages: prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase?
mitosis

What is the name of the muscle at the end of the esophagus?
sphincter

What do you call the high and low points of transverse waves?
crests and troughs

For each initial glucose molecules, two pyruvate molecules will enter where?
the mitochondria

Through which artery does blood enter the kidneys?
renal artery

Where do radio waves lie on the electromagnetic spectrum?
far left

What links the trophic levels from producers to top carnivores?
food chains

The waste of cows releases a lot of which type of gas?
methane

What allows giraffes to reach leaves that other ground animals cannot?
long necks

Chemical formulas for ionic compounds are called what?
ionic formulas

What term is used to describe the full range of electromagnetic waves?
electromagnetic spectrum

How many lobes is each hemisphere of the cerebrum divided into?
4

Varicose veins are veins that become enlarged because the valves no longer do this?
close properly

Liquids with strong intermolecular forces have higher what than liquids with weaker forces?
surface tension

What kind of volcanoes often form along divergent plate boundaries?
shield

An element symbol without a charge written next to it is assumed to be what?
uncharged atom

What is the fundamental unit of structure and function in all living organisms?
the cell

What characteristic of particles determines how they are carried by flowing water?
size

What term refers to something supplied by nature that helps support life?
natural resource

What is the shape of the orbits that planets make around the sun?
elliptical

What are chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis an example of?
bacterial stis

What organism are resistant to freezing and drying and also are metabolically inactive?
zygosporangia

What is produced during a condensation reaction?
water

What force pulls objects toward the center of the earth?
gravity

Where are protons and neutrons located?
central nucleus

What is a measurement of the amount of variation of the species in a given area called?
biodiversity

Deleting or inserting a nitrogen base causes what?
a frameshift mutation

What are the chemical messengers used to communicate between cells?
hormones

Graphite and diamond both are made from carbon. what makes diamonds so hard?
strong atomic network

The paranasal sinuses are hollow, air-filled spaces located within certain bones of the skull. all of the sinuses communicate with the nasal cavity (paranasal = “next to nasal cavity”) and are lined with this?
nasal mucosa

What determines the strength of a base when dissolved in water?
amount of hydroxide ions produced

What is the low level of radiation that occurs naturally in the environment called?
background radiation

Varicella zoster virus causes what two illnesses?
chicken pox and shingles

The urethra transports urine from what organ to the outside of the body for disposal?
bladder

Magnetite crystals in lava typically point to what geographic location?
magnetic north pole

Liquids that mix with water in all proportions are usually polar substances or substances that form these?
hydrogen bonds

Lattice energy cannot be measured directly. what is its calculation based on?
measured energy changes

What process provides over 99% of the energy supply for life on earth?
photosynthesis

What type of animal are most reptiles in regards to diet?
carnivores

Because of their reactivity, we do not find most representative metals as free elements where?
in nature

Two important concepts, niche and habitat, are associated with what?
ecosystem

When does diseases like alzheimer's become more common?
old age

What is a fibrocartilaginous pad that fills the gap between adjacent vertebral bodies?
intervertebral disc

What organic catalysts work by lowering the activation energy needed to start biochemical reactions?
enzymes

What structure supports the body, protects internal organs, produces blood cells, and maintains mineral homeostasis?
skeleton

When vertebrate animals metabolize ammonia what is the primary byproduct that is produced?
urea

Which process involves solvent separation on a solid medium?
chromatography

Plasmodesmata and gap junctions are channels between adjacent cells of what respective types?
plant and animal

Natural gas burns cleaner and produces less carbon dioxide than fuels of what type?
fossil fuels

What are the simplest types of carbon-based compounds?
hydrocarbons

What process moves food through the esophagus no matter which position the body is in?
peristalsis

The female reproductive organs include the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and what?
vagina

What do offsprings obtain from their parents in what is called, inheritance?
characteristics

Warming up your body before a workout does what to the blood flow?
increases it

What is a substance that increases the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution?
acid

Scientists ask questions, and then make detailed observations to try to ask more specific questions, in order to develop what?
hypothesis

What is the main difference between prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells ?
the presence of a nucleus

Supercontinents have formed at least how many times in earth history?
five

How are layers of the atmosphere divided?
temperature gradients

What term is used to describe molecules that contain carbon-nitrogen bonds?
amines

Birds have a flow-through respiratory system in which air flows unidirectionally from the posterior sacs into the lungs, then into these?
anterior air sacs

What are convection currents that occur far below the surface of the ocean called?
deep currents

Cations are attracted to anions, which are ions with what charge?
negative

A non-bony skeleton that forms outside of the body is known as a what?
exoskeleton

The vagina connects to which internal organ?
uterus

What is the measure of electric current?
ampheres

Name a passageway that is shared with the digestive system.
pharynx

What substances function as a long-term energy store in the human body and possess long carbon chains that prevent dissolving in water?
triglycerides

Thermal, radiant, electrical, nuclear, and chemical are all types of what?
energy

Coronary arteries ans small in what?
diameter

What occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen?
combustion reaction

What are the two basic types of competition called?
instraspecifc and interspecific

Algae are much simpler than protozoa. they are aquatic and contain this?
chlorophyll

What is a gram stain used to identify ?
different types of bacteria

Burning gas to run our cars is an example of how human activity is contributing to what global event?
climate change

The periodic table of elements is divided into what?
squares

Wave amplitude of a transverse wave is the difference in height between what and the resting position?
a crest

What is secreted before ejaculation to neutralize acidic urine remaining in the urethra?
clear mucus

Because conifers carry both male and female sporophylls on the same mature sporophyte, they are considered what type of plant?
monoecious

Who lack some of the defining traits of chordates?
adult humans

What does convection within the earth's mantel cause?
plates to move

Autoimmunity can develop with time, and its causes may be rooted in this?
molecular mimicry

Why does warm air rise higher in the troposphere?
it is less dense than cool air

Getting the same result when an experiment is repeated is called what?
replication

Some membranes have what kind of surfaces exposed to the cytoplasm?
hydrophobic

Plants and fungi cells have what basic cell structure, which animals do not have?
cell wall

The way in which the sun produces light is called what?
incandescence

What kind of light bulb contains a thin wire filament made of tungsten that gets hot and glows?
incandescent

What do you call a mixture in which some particles settle out of it when it is left standing?
suspension

What do you call the process of a solid becoming a liquid?
melting

Once a plant cell becomes specialized, what can they no longer do?
divide

The hardest natural substance, diamond is a form of what element?
carbon

Much of what type of radiation that strikes the planet is reflected back into space?
solar radiation

What particles are formed from a neutron in beta decay?
electron and a proton

What class of acids do carboxylic acids fall under?
organic acids

Plants can absorb inorganic nutrients and water through their root system, and what gas from the environment?
carbon dioxide

Giardia is an example of a protozoa that uses flagella for what purpose?
movement

Nearly all earthquakes occur where?
plate boundaries

Conotoxins released by certain marine snails can bring about paralysis in humans, indicating that this toxin attacks what system?
neurological

What is the second largest planet in the solar system?
saturn

Fruit comes from the ovaries of what types of plants?
flowering

Resistors connected end to end are said to be in what?
series

Molar mass is equal to density multiplied by what?
molar volume

What plastid makes and stores other pigments?
chromoplasts

What effect causes global winds to blow on a diagonal over the earth's surface?
coriolis effect

When members of the same species compete for the same resources, it is called what?
intraspecific competition

Antibiotics only target prokaryotic cells - they do not affect fungi, which are not prokaryotic, but instead what?
eukaryotic

What do bees carry from one plant to another to facilitate plant growth and development?
pollen

Why is the drift velocity negligible?
many free charges

Instruments that measure the angle of the slope of a volcano are called what?
tilt meters

What is the term for preserved remains or traces of organisms that lived in the past?
fossils

Birds flying thousands of miles south in the winter, then returning to their homes in spring, is a familiar example of what?
migration

The hydration of what is what makes many alcohols?
alkenes

What causes oxides to decompose?
heat

With codominance, both alleles are expressed equally in what?
heterozygotes

When hit from behind in a car crash, a passenger can suffer a neck injury called what?
whiplash

When a species always migrates, what is this type of migration called?
obligate migration

How are valuable metabolites recovered?
reabsorption

Structures that have lost their use through evolution are called _______
vestigial structures

What does continental crust grade into at continental margins?
oceanic crust

What body system consists of organs that break down food, absorb nutrients, and eliminate waste?
digestive system

Some samples of matter appear to have properties of solids, liquids, and/or gases at the same time. this can occur when the sample is composed of many what?
small pieces

Stimuli in the brain, stomach, and small intestine activate or inhibit production of what secretion?
gastric juice

What is the term for a symbiotic relationship in which one species benefits while the other species is not affected?
commensalism

What does the a1c test measure over the past two to three months?
blood-glucose levels

What is the term for liquid waste formed by kidneys?
urine

Why does metal conduct heat and electricity so well?
free flowing electrons

Liverworts are small plants that grow close  to what?
ground

What do atoms make by rearranging their chemical bonds in a reactant?
products

Spindle fibers pull what apart in anaphase i?
linked chromosomes

What type of mutations cannot be passed on to offspring?
somatic mutations

What is the process in which cells break down glucose, release the stored energy, and use it to make atp
cellular respiration

Dew point is the temperature at which what occurs?
condensation

In what type of diabetes can the pancreas still make insulin, but the cells of the body cannot use it efficiently?
type 2 diabetes

What are the two classifications of factors in the environment that affect organisms?
biotic and abiotic

What do increasing greenhouse gas concentrations in the air do to the earth's temperature?
raise it

What is the name of a microorganism that is considered important for living resources in all ecosystem?
bacteria

What bone cell is responsible for forming new bone and is found in the growing portions of bone, including the periosteum and endosteum?
osteoblast

Individuals with what condition experience depigmentation that results in lighter colored patches of skin?
vitiligo

What do decomposers release back to the environment after they break down the remains and other wastes?
simple inorganic molecules

What are the areas between cells that either allow or prevent the movement of materials called?
junctions

Arguably the most important ingredient in saliva for digestion is a type of what, which initiates the breakdown of carbohydrates?
enzyme

What element can form two different compounds with oxygen?
carbon

Each protein has its own unique sequence and shape held together by chemical interactions. if the protein is subject to changes in temperature, ph, or exposure to chemicals, the protein structure may change, losing its shape in what is known as this?
denaturation

Because they can cause diseases in plants, some parasitic fungi are considered what?
pathogenic

What is another common term for single-unit smooth muscle?
visceral muscle

What is the term for the horizontal displacement of a projectile from its starting point?
range

What types of stimuli control endocrine activity?
chemical and neural

What events, resulting in death of over half of animal species, have occurred on earth at least five times in the past 540 million years?
mass extinctions

What is most of the water used in agriculture used for?
irrigation

What is a collection of fibrin, platelets, and erythrocytes that has accumulated along the lining of a blood vessel called?
thrombus

Acidity is measured on what kind of scale?
ph scale

What is the enclosed, fluid-filled membrane that surrounds and protects the fetus and is attached to the placenta?
amniotic sac

Alzheimer’s disease is a disease that occurs mainly in what population?
older adults

What do sudoriferous glands secrete?
sweat

Group 15 of the periodic table is also called which group?
nitrogen

Humans need lipids for many vital functions such as storing energy and forming what?
cell membranes

What bond is a force of attraction between ions and atoms?
chemical bond

What type of cells are the smallest of all human cells?
sperm

Vertebrates also require relatively large quantities of calcium and phosphorus for building and maintaining what?
bone

What contains most of the structures found in skin?
dermis

What is the study of matter and energy referred to as?
physical science

What do you call the ability of a particular electrochemical cell to generate an electric current?
electrical potential

What is a controlled scientific study of specific variables called?
experiment

What happened to earth's species during the permian period?
mass extinction

Which organ in the body controls the amount of water loss in urine in response to maintaining homeostasis?
kidneys

What is corrosive mixture is formulated by the combination of water, air and sulfur?
sulfuric acid

What type of pollutants enter the air directly?
primary

What type of reaction is a process in which some substances, called reactants, change into different substances, called products?
chemical reaction

What is the number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula that shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction?
coefficient

Through what does urine enter the bladder?
the ureters

The male and female reproductive system is regulated by follicle-stimulating hormone (fsh) and luteinizing hormone (lh) produced by what gland?
pituitary

How do plants grow?
through cell growth and cell division

What part of the brain is attached to the brain stem but considered a separate region of the adult brain?
cerebellum

Plants are described by what term, meaning their cells have a nucleus and membrane-bound organelles?
eukaryotic

What is a primary source of the hormone melatonin?
pineal gland

How many more times likely are men to suffer from iron overload?
ten times

Misfolding of polypeptides is a serious problem in what?
cells

What does the inner membrane divide into two internal compartments?
mitochondrion

Defined as total distance traveled divided by elapsed speed, average speed is a scalar quantity that does not include what?
direction

Lymph capillaries collect fluid that leaks out of what?
blood capillaries

Action potentials occur whenever a depolarization increases the membrane voltage to a particular value called what?
threshold

Programmed cell death is also known as?
apoptosis

What happens to the mass number during a nuclear decay process by positron emission?
remains unchanged

Embryos usually don't survive if they have extra or too few of these genetic units?
chromosomes

Like the other outer planets, neptune has rings of ice and what?
dust

In an electromagnetic wave, what do the crests and troughs represent?
oscillating fields

What biome is located between the temperate and tropical biomes?
subtropical

Metabolism is the sum of all catabolic and which other reactions in the body?
anabolic

Diarrhea due to food poisoning is an example of a problem involving what organ system?
digestive system

White light is a mixture of all wavelengths of what?
visible light

What prevents solutes that have accumulated in the xylem from leaking back into the soil solution?
the endodermis

Hydrogen chloride contains one atom of hydrogen and one atom of what?
chlorine

What property of toluene and xylene makes them important in the chemical industry?
solvent property

The earliest cells were prokaryotes, surrounded by a cell membrane but lacking which key structure?
nucleus

When is the rate of the forward reaction equal to the rate of the reverse reaction?
at equilibrium

In which process do signaling molecules from embryonic cells cause transcriptional changes in nearby target cells?
induction

Every species has a characteristic number of what?
chromosomes

Ecologists already use the abilities of many prokaryotes to carry out bioremediation of soils and what else?
water

How is most evidence gathered in science?
lab experiments

Phosphate groups are found within phospholipids and what else?
nucleotides

Yogurt is made with milk fermented with what?
bacteria

What is energy from the sun called?
solar energy

What is the term for when gravity pulls soil, mud, and rocks down cliffs and hillsides?
mass movement

Metals are good conductors of what?
electricity

What plant hormone allows plants to curve in a specific direction?
auxin

What is the most common type of organic compound?
carbohydrates

Dissolved oxygen in seawater is critical for sea creatures, but as the oceans warm, oxygen becomes less what?
soluble

Light waves differ based on their frequency and what else?
amplitude

What kind of diseases can be difficult to treat because they live inside the host's cells, making it hard to destroy them without killing host cells?
viral diseases

What type of cellular respiration occurs in the presence of oxygen?
aerobic

Stomata must control the transpiration of water vapor and the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen that take place during what process?
photosynthesis

If pollination and fertilization occur, a diploid zygote forms within an ovule, located where
ovary

What makes up 99 percent of air?
nitrogen and oxygen

What is the process in which producers get their energy from sources other than the sun?
chemosynthesis

Parasitism, mutualism, and commensalism are instances of what type of interaction?
symbiotic

The cell wall of plants is made up of a complex carbohydrate that is a polymer of what sugar?
glucose

Which metal is not a solid even at room temperature?
mercury

How do molecules react when a gas is heated?
they move faster

Mountain building and earthquakes are some of the responses of rocks when subected to what?
stress

What is defined as maintaining a stable internal environment?
homeostasis

What element chemically weathers rock by combining with a metal?
oxygen

Porifera are parazoans that exhibit simple organization and lack true what?
tissues

The values of which factors are controlled by the experimenter over the course of an experiment?
independent variables

What are the most common causes of brain injuries?
falls

Electrons are located at fixed distances from the nucleus, what are they called?
energy levels

Which factor has a big impact on coastal climates?
large ocean currents

What occurs when light bends as it passes from one type of matter to another?
refraction

What is  a polymer formed by chain addition reactions between monomers that contain a double bond called?
an addition polymer

What do you call resources that can be replaced at the rate they are being used?
renewable

The type of vesicle transport that moves a substance out of the cell is called?
exocytosis

What characteristic of birds is related to the food they eat?
beak

What tube carries urine out of the body?
urethra

What plant products may be classified as simple, aggregate, multiple, or accessory, depending on their origin?
fruits

What term describes the amount of material present in an object?
mass

What class of animals includes the subgroups rodents, carnivores, insectivores, bats, and primates?
mammals

What is the transfer of thermal energy by waves that can travel through empty space called?
radiation

The lighter photic zone and darker aphotic zone are determined by what?
water depth

Plant cuttings are an example of what type of reproduction?
asexual

Destructive interference in waves occurs when what things overlap?
two troughs

When two plates of continental crust collide, the material pushes upward and forms what?
high mountain range

What is split to produce nuclear energy?
atoms

What measures the amount of matter in an object?
mass

What is the primary component of steel alloys?
iron

Light energy is absorbed by which kind of molecule?
chlorophyll

What is the second class of fish after ray-finned fish?
lobe-finned fish

Regulation of endocrine depends on the hypothalmus and what other gland?
pituitary

What according to scientists is the major cause of depression?
low serotonin levels

What is a soft, malleable, and corrosion resistant material called?
lead

Momentum is a vector quantity that has the same direction as what?
object ' s velocity

What type of role does cartilage play in the human skeleton?
insignificant

Prokaryotes divide via binary fission and do not undergo what process of cell division?
mitosis

Light with the shortest wavelength appears as what color?
violet

What is lava called before it reaches the surface of the earth?
magma

What is the term for atherosclerosis of arteries that supply the heart muscle?
coronary heart disease

Food is chemical energy stored in what?
organic molecules

What has a bigger impact on water quality, natural events or human activity?
human activity

What is the amount of energy required to begin a chemical reaction known as?
activation energy

Acne is a skin disturbance that typically occurs on areas of the skin that are rich in sebaceous glands (face and back). it is most common along with the onset of puberty due to association with these?
hormonal changes

What are the two main components in a battery?
anode and a cathode

Lots of volcanoes form along which boundaries?
subduction plate boundaries

Which body organ filters the blood in the body and creates urine?
the kidneys

Compared with the molecules of many other substances, molecules of water are strongly attracted to what?
each other

Greater reflection off what atmospheric layer allows am radio waves to travel even farther at night than they can during the day?
ionosphere

Earth spinning as air moves over its surface causes what?
coriolis effect

Beryllium hydride consists of a central beryllium atom with two single bonds to what?
hydrogen atoms

Amides are actually formed by bringing together an amine-containing molecule and molecule containing what?
carboxylic acid

What are long living plasma cells called?
memory cells

When do homologous chromosomes separate and go to different gametes?
during meiosis

What type of cells are often the product of normal cells that have lost the ability to regulate the cell cycle?
cancerous cells

Which ductless gland releases secretions directly into surrounding tissues and fluids?
endocrine gland

When different types of tissues work together to perform a unique function, what do they form?
organ

Over 90% of the energy we use comes originally from what?
sun

What term is used to describe  an illusion that light from faraway objects is reflected by a pool of water that is not really there?
mirage

How do prokaryotes reproduce?
asexually

What does hemoglobin in blood carry to the cells?
oxygen

Surface tension comes from the fact that particles at the surface of a liquid do not experience interactions from all directions which leads to what on the surface?
imbalance of forces

Where do biochemical reactions occer?
inside organisms

What type of behavior has the advantage of being flexible and capable of changing to suit changing conditions?
learned behavior

This process breaks rocks and other surface materials into much smaller pieces?
weathering

What is the main element in organic compounds?
carbon

What is the basic unit of matter?
atoms

What theory proposes that microorganisms are the cause of many diseases?
germ theory

Water is a polar compound, so its molecules are attracted to each other and form what kind of bonds?
hydrogen

What is the term for a substance that causes the speed of a reaction to increase?
catalyst

What is it called when rays focus at different distances from the lens?
spherical aberration

Brass and bronze are examples of what type of mixture composed of two or more elements, at least one of which is a metal?
alloy

What is a region of repetitive noncoding nucleotide sequences at each end of a chromosome?
telomere

What is the color of mercury oxide?
red

At a convergent plate boundary, when one plate is oceanic, there are large what?
volcanoes

What is the term for the wavelengths of light humans can see?
visible light

What is the charge on a single electron known as?
elementary charge

What mineral that occurs in bones helps combat osteoporosis?
calcium

When the wind deposits sand, it forms small hills, what are these hills called?
sand dunes

Carboxylic acids have an acidic hydrogen atom, but esters do not. what do esters have in place of an acidic hydrogen atom?
hydrocarbon group

Latitude, humidity, and elevation affect the type of what, a term for a large naturally occurring community?
biome

The distance between two crests of a wave of light is referred to as what, which is related to the color of light?
wavelength

What is the basic unit of structure and function in all organisms?
the cell

Which organ in the human body filters blood and excretes urine?
the kidney

Sugars are simple types of what biochemical compounds and possess relatively small molecules?
carbohydrates

What type of tissue is blood?
connective

What is the force that causes objects to fall down to the ground?
gravity

The distance of stars is measured in what terms, meaning the light takes many thousands of years to reach us?
light years

What type of matter often sinks into cracks between rocks?
liquid

Name a one-celled organism that  can be found on your skin, in the ground, or in all different types of water.
bacteria

What type of power is generated using a nonrenewable resource?
nuclear power

The earth is tilted on its what?
axis

What can human facial expressions communicate?
emotions

What are the two types of vascular plants?
seedless and seed

What type of flexion is the bending of the neck or body toward the right or left side?
lateral

Common wisdom has it that the temporal bone (temporal = “time”) is so named because this area of the head (the temple) is where hair typically first turns gray, indicating the passage of what?
time

Catenulids typically reproduce asexually by budding where?
their posterior end

What gland secretes a fluid that mixes with sperm to help form semen?
prostate gland

During an earthquake what causes seismic waves?
rock displacement

What term describes waves that travel through matter?
mechanical waves

What type of radioactive decay is generally only dangerous when emitted inside the body?
alpha decay

Energy that is stored in a person or object is called?
potential energy

What is a sac filled with fluid or other material?
a cyst

What is released during an enthalpy reaction?
heat

Solutions of ionic compounds and melted ionic compounds conduct what?
electricity

Quantum mechanics involves the study of material at what level?
atomic

What is the name of muscular blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart?
arteries

He mass spectrometer measures the percent abundance of different what?
isotopes

For what kind of animal is communication essential?
social animals

The wavelength of a wave is the distance between corresponding points on what?
adjacent waves

Sandblasting a surface exemplifies what form of erosion?
abrasion

How do fungus-like protists such as slime molds reproduce?
with spores

Exchange occurs directly with the external environment in what type of organisms?
unicellular organisms

Which part of a neuron contains the nucleus and most of the major organelles?
cell body

The oceans affect earth’s atmosphere and influence its what?
climate

What are surrounded by a cell wall consisting of peptidoglycan?
bacteria

Snake venom may join the class of drugs collectively known as thrombolytic agents, which can help speed up the degradation of an abnormal what?
clot

Thousands of receptor cells that detect the sex attractant equip each filament of what structure?
antenna

All solutions contain at least how many substances?
two

Life probably began where?
oceans

An enzyme is an organic catalyst produced by what?
living cell

Gasoline is derived from which other liquid?
oil

What is the disease in which cells grow out of control and form abnormal masses?
cancer

What travels at a rate of 300,000 kilometers per second, or nearly instantaneously?
light

When atomic orbitals hybridize, the valence electrons occupy these?
newly created orbitals

Roundworms feed on various things, one of them being decaying organic matter.  doing this, they play an important role in what famous cycle?
carbon cycle

In preparation for phagocytosis, a portion of the inward-facing surface of the plasma membrane becomes coated with a protein called clathrin, which stabilizes this section of what?
membrane

What is the main form of energy storage in plants?
starch

Something supplied by nature that helps support life, including ecosystems as well as minerals and fossil fuels, is called a what?
natural resource

Initial substances are called reactants, and the final substances are called what?
products

What were the electrons initially called?
cathode rays

What is the type of energy that involves movement?
mechanical energy

What do sharks use to secrete salt to assist in osmoregulation?
rectal gland

Why do viruses not belong to any domain of life?
they are nonliving

What is a change in the sequence of bases in dna or rna called?
mutation

Metallic solids are composed entirely of which atoms?
metallic

What compound gives tarnished copper it's green color?
copper carbonate

As the population grows, competition for food does what?
grows

What is the property by which water molecules stick together?
cohesion

What is the main sex hormone in males called?
testosterone

What is the name of the tube that joins the mouth to the digestive and respiratory tracts?
pharynx

Unlike bryophyte and fern spores (which are haploid cells dependent on moisture for rapid development of gametophytes), seeds contain a diploid embryo that will germinate into what?
sporophyte

Limestone is insoluble in water, so what can dissolve it?
acid

Monatomic ions have an oxidation number equal to their what?
charge

Some flatworms are free-living carnivores that live mainly in which type of habitats?
aquatic

Characterized by a short lifespan, what begin with production in the bone marrow under the influence of csfs and interleukins?
leukocytes

What force is perpendicular to velocity and causes uniform circular motion?
centripetal force

What are physical properties that do not depend on the substance present called?
intensive properties

What does the secretion of the hormone cholecystokinin stimulate the release of?
pancreatic juices, bile

What term is used to describe the electrostatic process used by most copy machines?
xerography

Symptoms of viral diseases result from what kind of response to a virus?
immune

The most common carbon atoms have six protons and six neutrons in their what?
nuclei

What type of organisms have internal clocks that regulate cyclic processes?
eukaryotic

How often does condensation occur in your cells?
constantly

Overharvesting is a serious threat particularly to which species?
aquatic species

What are the cells that break down inorganic molecules to supply energy for the cell, and use carbon dioxide as a carbon source?
chemoautotrophs

Each type of electromagnetic radiation has a characteristic range of wavelengths. the longer the wavelength (or the more stretched out it appears), the less energy is carried. short, tight waves carry what?
most energy

What are clouds on earth made of?
water vapor

What do extensive properties depend on the amount of?
matter in a sample

What is the term for the rate at which velocity changes?
acceleration

What determines which codon in the mrna the trna will bind to?
anticodon

What is the term for the complete set of genes and alleles within a population?
the gene pool

What unit of pressure is named for the scientist whose discoveries about pressure in fluids led to a law of the same name?
pascal

Oxygen and what are required for rust to form?
water

What is the process called in which a magnet loses its magnetic properties?
demagnetization

The earliest animals were which kind of invertebrates?
aquatic

A lake is an example of what type of biome?
freshwater biome

What kinds of waves are composed of various oscillating electric and magnetic fields?
electromagnetic

When is the sun directly over the equator?
equinox

What does the base of a nucleotide within dna consist of?
nitrogen

Which bones are flat and triangular and located at the back of the pectoral girdle?
scapulae

What always has the same elements in the same ratio?
compound

Prior to ovulation, ovarian steroid hormones stimulate the uterus to prepare for support of what?
embryo

All polar compounds contain what type of bonds?
polar

What often occurs on steep slopes in dry climates?
landslides

What kind of organisms have many different types of specialized cells with particular jobs?
multicellular

Part of the scientific process, these are statistical probabilities rather than certainties?
predictions

Ecology is a major branch of what higher-level "classification" of science?
biology

What is necessary for organisms to survive in the deepest parts of the ocean?
adaptations

What is the process of larva becoming an adult called?
metamorphosis

Capillaries rejoin to form venules, which convey blood to what?
veins

Although it is not vital to humans, calcitonin is important for calcium homeostasis in adults of some species in what group characterized by backbones?
vertebrates

What force holds planets in their orbits?
gravity

The nature of what gives metals the properties of being ductile and malleable?
metallic bonds

What are the special compartments that are surrounded by membranes inside eukaryotic cells called?
organelles

Molds and casts usually form in which type of rock?
sedimentary

What is a hole that is dug or drilled through the ground down to an aquifer called?
well

When is a moving car said to be in dynamic equilibrium?
zero net force

Every chemical reaction between molecules involves breaking and forming of what?
bonds

The mass percentage of a solution component is defined as the ratio of the component’s mass to ________?
solution ’ s mass

Harmful instances of what can result in errors in protein sequence that yield non-functional proteins?
mutation

When dissolved in water, the base sodium hydroxide (naoh) produces sodium ions with what charge?
positive

What precious resource allows us to grow food as well as materials we turn into clothing and medicine?
soil

In what part of the body do escherichia coli bacteria live?
your intestines

Which state of matter has an intermediate level of entropy between solid and gas?
liquid

In recent years, it has been hypothesized that molecules in the environment also act as?
endocrine disruptors

What is the diversity of living things called?
biodiversity

All lipids have two distinct domains, a hydrophobic and a what?
hydrophilic

Oxytocin, which stimulates the contractions of labor, is a type of what?
hormone

When represented by a single letter dominant alleles are represented by what case letter?
uppercase

What do loess deposits form?
vertical cliffs

Electrical messages are carried by chemicals called what?
neurotransmitters

Another major cause of extinction is global warming , which is also known as?
global climate change

What shape rash is formed from a skin infection caused by trichophyton?
ring-shaped

What type of bonds only form in metals?
metallic bonds

The last major ice age took place in which era?
pleistocene

What signals the secretion of gastric acid?
gastrin

Each microspore develops into a pollen grain containing a male what?
gametophyte

What is used to describe gas concentrations of a solution?
mole fractions

What type of organism has many different specialized cells that work together to carry out life processes?
multicellular organism

What types of bonds hold together positive metal ions and their valence electrons?
metallic bonds

The once compressed universe expanded rapidly after what nicknamed event billions of years ago?
big bang

Do metals tend to gain electrons or lose electrons in chemical reactions?
lose electrons

Living things evolve what characteristics that make them better suited for their environment?
adaptations

Where are the two tonsils located?
throat

The chemistry of each element is determined by its number of what?
protons and electrons

What is defined as the amount of force acting on a given area?
pressure

Which type of energy is the energy of anything in motion?
kinetic engergy

What are large sheets of ice that cover relatively flat ground called?
continental glaciers

What is the accelerating pattern of increasing population size called?
exponential growth

Ions can be formed when atoms lose what other particles?
electrons

Deserts are generally dry ecosystems having very little what?
rainfall

The average number of individuals per unit of area can be expressed as what?
population density

The top 200 meters of water is called what zone?
the photic zone

A homogeneous mixture with tiny particles in it is known as what?
solution

What is the term for decomposers that consume dead leaves, animal feces, and other organic debris collected on the ground or at the bottom of water?
detritivores

If a gas in a closed area experiences increases in pressure and decreases in temperatures, what other attribute of the gas will be affected?
volume

What is the term for the hard covering that protects insects, crustaceans, and spiders?
exoskeleton

What gas is expired out of the body during exhalation?
carbon dioxide

Through this process, algae provide glucose for the ecosystem?
photosynthesis

What determines your hair color trait?
genes

What layer of skin is directly under the epidermis?
the dermis

What is caused by bodies sliding over rough surfaces?
friction

The electromagnetic spectrum represents the full range of frequency of what type of wave?
electromagnetic

Distinguishing between homology and analogy is critical in reconstructing what?
phylogenies

What do many mollusks secrete for their protection?
calcareous shell

What were the first particles with mass to be directly confirmed to have the wavelength proposed by de broglie?
electrons

What is a simple machine that consists of a rope wrapped around a grooved wheel?
a pulley

What helps screen libraries for a gene of interest using nucleic acid hybridization?
nucleic acid probe

What is one way of classifying organisms called?
clade

The earliest stages of spermatogenesis occur closest to the lumen of the what?
seminiferous tubules

Which of the electromagnetic waves have the shortest wavelengths and highest frequencies?
gamma

The oxidation of an alcohol can produce either an aldehyde or what?
ketone

Change in momentum in an object is equivalent to what other measurement?
impulse

Where does most water evaporate from?
oceans

Which waves have the longest wavelengths but the least energy in the atmosphere?
radio waves

The effect of gravity on circulation means that it is harder to get blood up from the legs as the body takes on this?
vertical orientation

Red blood cells, white blood cells and what other cell is found in blood?
platelets

How many dimensions can humans see in?
three

What do you call the unhealthy synthetic lipids created when unsaturated fatty acids are artificially manufactured to have straight chains?
trans fatty acids

In what type of climate might one find deciduous trees?
humid continental

Cellular respiration involves forming atp from what type of sugar?
glucose

The magnitude of the wave function at a particular point in space is proportional to what property of the wave at that point?
amplitude

Representing a leap in scientific understanding, einstein described what as a dent in the fabric of space and time?
gravity

Green algae and land plants are closely what?
related

How many alleles control a characteristic?
2

All living things are able to produce what?
offspring

What is the smallest volcanic landform that is formed from accumulation of many small fragments of ejected material?
cinder cones

What are surface currents mainly caused by?
winds

What kind of solids are generally classified by the forces that hold their particles together and include ionic, metallic, covalent network, and molecular types?
crystalline solids

What can often be used to measure distance?
maps

Which single most factor is responsible for the extinction of hundreds of species of birds?
human actions

The differing glycosidic linkages in starch and cellulose give the two molecules what kind of distinct shapes?
three-dimensional

What is the angiosperm seed surrounded by?
ovary

Which process helps bacteria in the gut break down the remains of the digested food?
fermentation

Unlike wild animals, what type of species are genetically uniform, making them more vulnerable to die-out from disease?
domestic species

The diapsids diverged into two groups, the archosauromorpha (“ancient lizard form”) and the lepidosauromorpha (“scaly lizard form”) during what time period?
mesozoic

A few elements, called what, can conduct electricity, but not as well as metals?
metalloids

Which type of eruptions created the entire ocean floor?
fissure eruptions

What is damaged in the inner ear by loud sounds that cause hearing loss?
hair cells

The energy in sunlight is also known as what kind of energy?
solar energy

In what form is the heat absorbed when you heat ice and it reaches a temperature of 0 c?
potential energy

The sugar of one nucleotide binds to what group of the next nucleotide?
the phosphate

How does the image focused by the eye travel to the brain?
the optic nerve

If a human only has 45 chromosomes it is most likely due to a mistake during what?
meiosis

The digestive organs within the abdominal cavity are held in place by the peritoneum, a broad serous membranous sac made up of squamous epithelial tissue surrounded by this?
connective tissue

What season causes people to look forward to spring?
winter

What are the narrowest blood vessels, where oxygen is transferred into body cells?
capillaries

What is quantified by measuring the number of decay processes per unit time?
radioactivity

What is a measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object of a given mass?
weight

What is the atomic number?
number of protons

Some isotopes are stable indefinitely, while others are radioactive and do what through a characteristic form of emission?
decay

Cellular respiration uses oxygen to harvest what from organic molecules?
energy

A red blood cell will swell and burst when placed in a?
hypotonic solution

Which type of lava lavas are less viscous and erupt effusively?
mafic

What are often formed biologically during the breakdown of proteins in animal cells, having the smell of death and decay?.
amines

What produces the centripetal force to keep the earth orbiting the sun?
gravity

Group 13 of the periodic table is also called what?
the boron group

What type of tissue transports water and minerals in a vascular plant?
xylem

What produces enzymes that digest carbohydrates in plant cell walls?
bacteria

At what temperature does solid water melt to a liquid?
at temperatures above 0 degrees c

How many more legs do spiders have compared to insects?
two

Almost all energy at earth's surface comes from where?
the sun

What is the first step in protein synthesis?
transcription

What branch of biology focuses on heredity?
genetics

Stars are born in clouds, and they form and grow dense due to what force?
gravity

What has atoms with unstable nuclei?
radioisotope

What is the tissue beneath a mollusks' shell called?
mantle

What is formed from an alcohol that loses water?
alkenes

What is the division of the body into multiple parts called?
segmentation

What reproductive method has two parents involved?
sexually

In many cases, the alkali metal amide salt (mnh2) is not very soluble in liquid ammonia and does what?
precipitates

An example of beta decay is the emission of an electron by a carbon-14 what?
nucleus

Which theory describes the distribution of electrons in molecules in much the same way that the distribution of electrons in atoms is described using atomic orbitals?
molecular orbital theory

Oversecretion of insulin can cause what?
hypoglycemia

The first few species to colonize a disturbed area are called what?
pioneer species

What are the two loops of blood flow in the cardiovascular system?
pulmonary and systemic

What is the name of a group of hereditary diseases that affect the body's ability to control blood clotting?
hemophilia

Protists which use their tails to eat are called what?
filter-feeders

What term is used to describe foods containing active cultures of beneficial bacteria?
probiotic

What helps control the muscles and maintain balance?
nervous system

What unit of power is equal to 1 joule of energy per second?
watt

What is just below the cerebrum and coordinates body movements?
cerebellum

What part of blood releases clotting factors?
platelets

Adding carbon to iron makes what type of metal?
steel

Which structure includes sugar-phosphate "backbones", composed of alternating phosphate groups and deoxyribose sugars, and nitrogenous bases?
dna double helix

In a hydrogen replacement reaction, the hydrogen in the acid is replaced by what?
an active metal

Mitosis and meiosis are both forms of division of the nucleus in these?
eukaryotic cells

What is the last step in a scientific investigation?
communicating findings

Where is multiple fission more often observed?
among protists

What type of invertebrates where the earliest animals?
aquatic invertebrates

Unlike wood and glass, steel is an example of a material that responds to what force?
magnetic

Carefully controlling the speed of a fission reaction produces what kind of energy?
nuclear

When two electric contacts come together it completes a what?
cricuit

Pure nonpolar covalent bonds exist only between what?
two identical atoms

The decay rate is measured in a unit called the what?
half-life

What is a condition in which a material called plaque builds up inside arteries?
atherosclerosis

Quarks in the middle energy family are found in cosmic rays and are produced in what?
particle accelerators

What celestial body in the solar system makes up most of its total mass?
sun

Free ear lobes, widow's peak and a dimpled chin are examples of what kind of traits in humans?
mendelian

Producing light without heat is called what?
luminescence

What natural part of the water cycle can cause damage and death?
floods

How many large eggs are generated during oogenesis?
one

Gaseous nitrogen is converted into forms that can be used by plants during a process called what?
nitrogen fixation

What is an example of a disease that affects the blood?
anemia

Name the term used to described prokaryotes that require oxygen.
aerobic

Many ionic compounds with relatively large cations and a 1:1 cation:anion ratio have this structure, which is called the what?
cesium chloride structure

What property increases as an object's mass increases, making a full box harder to push than an empty one?
inertia

What will happen to sea levels due to increased global temperatures?
rise

Sea-lilies, sea cucumbers and sea stars fall into what class of organism?
echinoderms

What kind of rock forms when material such as gravel, sand, silt or clay is compacted and cemented together?
sedimentary

In science, we need to make observations on various phenomena to form and test what?
hypotheses

What do industries use water to generate?
electricity

Mammals are synapsids, meaning they have a single opening in what structure?
skull

What are the properties of solutions called that depend only on the concentration of dissolved particles and not on their identity?
colligative properties

Liquids that mix with each other in all proportions are said to be miscible, maning they have infinite mutual what?
solubility

Which law relates the pressure, volume, and temperature of a gas?
combines gas law

Heat and light are forms of what, which refers to the ability to do work?
energy

Volcano chains form as an oceanic plate moves over what?
hot spot

What type of planet is jupiter?
a gas giant

What does antifreeze do to the freezing temperature of the water in car radiators?
lowers it

What process typically occurs to metal exposed to outside elements?
corrosion

The innermost layer of the sun is known as what?
core

Motor neurons and sensory neurons are part of what nervous system?
sensory-somatic

What type of science is the study of matter and energy and includes chemistry and physics?
physical science

When plants lose their leaves in the fall, what chemical is produced less to cause the change?
chlorophyll

In which kind of animals does parthenogenesis occur?
invertebrates

What is the name of the temporary organ that begins to form from the trophoblast layer of cells shortly after implantation?
placenta

What term is used to describe anything that takes up space and has mass?
matter

What is the organ that senses sound?
ear

What can be described in terms of size, density, and distribution?
populations

What is the term for the simplest form of matter that has a unique set of properties?
an element

What causes light to refract?
slowing down

Capacitors can be used to filter out low frequencies. for example, a capacitor in series with a sound reproduction system rids it of the 60 hz what?
hum

What is made up of nerve cells that sense stimuli and transmit signals?
nervous tissue

Some animals prepare for the long winter by going into what?
hibernation

It may seem as though burning destroys matter, but the same amount of what, still exists after a campfire as before?
mass

Different isotopes of an element have different mass numbers because they have different numbers of what?
neutrons

Density is defined as the mass of an object divided by its what?
volume

What element is responsible for one-half of the osmotic pressure gradient that exists between the interior of cells and their surrounding environment?
sodium

What types of orbits do comets usually have?
elliptical

What describes how close an estimate is to a known standard?
accuracy

Canoe paddles, nutcracker, and hammer are examples of what type of simple machine?
lever

What do most species of monkeys have that no apes or humans do?
tail

What are joints in which the bones are connected by a band of connective tissue?
syndesmoses

What are the four stages of food processing?
ingestion, digestion, absorption, and elimination

What are different forms of the same gene?
alleles

What is the wheeled robot developed by nasa to explore the surface of mars?
mars rover

What effect does taking anabolic steroids have on testosterone production?
reduces it

Living in a large colony requires good communication. ants communicate with chemicals called what?
pheromones

What complex carbohydrates are the polymers of glucose?
starches

What is the term for the shallow space above the zygomatic arch in a skull?
temporal fossa

What is the inner layer of skin called?
the dermis

Many european and asiatic elms are less susceptible to dutch elm disease than which elms?
american

What does a thermometer measure?
temperature

What are plant-like protists called?
algae

What is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water called?
water treatment

Original atoms are called what type of isotopes?
parent

What do you call an area covered with water, or possessing very soggy soil, all or part of the year?
wetland

In which continent are meerkats most likely to be found?
africa

What is the name of the thin layer that acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere?
stratopause

What is the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body?
excretion

Which measure shows how individuals in a population are distributed, or spread throughout their area?
population distribution

What is a simple carbohydrate with the chemical formula c 6 h 12 o 6 better known as?
glucose

Groups of related organs form what?
organ systems

Each lymph organ has a different job in what system?
immune

The number of protons in an atom is called what?
atomic number

Crevasses are found in glaciers.  how do these come about?
from movement

Combining nonpolar olive oil and polar vinegar yields what type of mixture?
heterogeneous

If no conclusion is reached after an experiment, the scientist may retest what?
hypothesis

What builds up in an artery and reduces blood flow?
plaque

Compounds with metals and nonmetals sharing electrons are known as what kinds of compounds?
ions

What are the only organisms that can perform photosynthesis?
autotrophs

What is an interesting example of a molecule with two central atoms, which are both c atoms?
acetylene

What is the name of the fungi that are ubiquitous in lakes and soil?
chytrids

All the atoms of a given element have the same number of what in their nucleus, though they may have different numbers of neutrons?
protons

What causes a voltage to exist across the membrane in cells?
difference in charges

A synergist that makes the insertion site more stable is called a what?
fixator

What system of the body is generally responsible for breathing?
respiratory system

Carbon dioxide does not rise like other gases because it has a density greater than what?
air

What is the property that determines the amount of current flow through a particular material?
resistance

In glycolysis, glucose is split into two molecules of pyruvate. this results in a net gain of?
two atp molecules

What organ do we use to hear sound?
the ear

Mixture of metals is called what?
alloy

The rate the magma cools determines what property of the rock?
texture

Conduction from the core has what effect on the lower mantle?
it heats it

What is the measure of the amount of energy found in sound waves?
intensity

What theory explains most of the features of earth’s surface?
plate tectonics

What part of a person with myopia is longer than normal?
eye

The anodes in each cell of a rechargeable battery are plates or grids of lead containing spongy lead metal, while the cathodes are similar grids containing powdered what?
lead dioxide

In science, what is supported by much evidence, widely accepted by credible scientists, and unlikely to be disproved?
theory

Life on earth is carbon-based. organisms need not only energy but also carbon ________ for building bodies?
atoms

A crater can usually be found on the top of what kind of volcanoes?
composite

Portal veins carry blood between what?
pairs of capillary beds

Viruses depend on what type of cells?
host cells

Silver and ordinary table salt are two examples of chemical what?
substances

What do we call the system of classification consisting of a hierarchy of groupings called taxa?
linnaean system

Which disease causes cells to divide out of control
cancer

Animal cells grow mainly by synthesizing protein-rich cytoplasm, a process that is described as expensive in what way?
metabolically

Where is the cell wall located?
outside cell membrane

Some protists hunt their food or act as what?
parasites

Name what nutrient cycling is strongly regulated by.
vegetation

Why must values of specific heat be looked up in tables?
difficult to calculate

What is the method of evolution by which advantageous heritable traits become more common over generations?
natural selection

Electrons move, but they aren’t destroyed. this is the law of conservation of what?
charge

What type of orbitals do electrons in successive atoms on the periodic table tend to fill first?
low-energy

What is used as a vector for gene insertion in ex vivo gene therapy?
virus

In artificial passive immunization, which items from an immune animal are injected into a nonimmune animal?
antibodies

What kind of solids are gummi bears or taffy?
amorphous solids

In the freshwater flatworms, protonephridia serve chiefly in what?
osmoregulation

What is contained in the skin of brightly colored poison dart frogs?
toxins

What is the exchange of plasmids by prokaryotes called?
genetic transfer

What do we call the study of rock layers?
stratigraphy

What are single-celled organisms that lack a nucleus called?
prokaryotes

The distance that light can travel in a year is known as what?
light year

Scientists who find and study fossils are called what?
paleontologists

What is it called when feces move along the colon too slowly?
constipation

What is the process in which a solid changes directly to a gas called?
sublimation

What part of the atmosphere is the heat source?
stratosphere

Some mutations lead to new versions of proteins that help organisms adapt to changes in their environment and are essential for evolution to occur.  what are these mutations known as?
beneficial mutations

What is the only substance on earth that is stable in all three states?
water

What is the process whereby excess water and waste is removed from the body?
excretion

What cellular structure moves molecules between locations inside the cell?
transport vesicles

Alcohols can be oxidized to aldehydes or _______.
ketones

What causes a meteoroid to vaporize after it enters the atmosphere?
friction with atmosphere

How is the radioactive decay measured?
half-life

What term means a reproductive cell, like the human egg in females?
gamete

Veins are blood vessels that carry blood toward what?
heart

The spin quantum number describes the spin for a given what?
electron

What fuels provide most of the energy used worldwide?
fossil

What instruments used in guidance systems to indicate directions in space must have an angular momentum that does not change in direction?
gyroscopes

What are the deepest places on earth?
deep sea trenches

While the chromosome is replicating, the cell does what?
elongates

On the origin of species is a book by darwin that spells out what theory?
theory of evolution

After an adaptive defense is produced against a pathogen, typically plasma cells first secrete immunoglobin, which constitutes about ten percent of all what?
antibodies

Solar and wind are still expensive compared to what?
fossil fuels

The pollen tube discharges two sperm into the female gametophyte after what occurs?
pollination

Steel, bronze, and brass are good examples of what?
alloys

Most hydrozoa have both polyp and what forms in their life cycle?
medusa

Mammalian lungs are located in what cavity, where they are surrounded and protected by the rib cage, intercostal muscles, and chest wall?
thoracic

Segmented worms have a digestive,nervous and what type of system?
circulatory

In what route do water and solutes move along the continuum of cytosol?
symplastic

Atomic orbitals are populated with what subatomic particles?
electrons

Which law refers to the electron charge remaining the same during transfer?
law of conservation of charge

Hotspots can be used to tell the speed and direction that what object is moving?
plates

Does overhead irrigation or drip irrigation use less water?
drip irrigation

Stis are diseases caused by what that spread through sexual contact?
pathogens

The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood through which system?
circulatory

Being dependent on adults for a long maturation period allows young primates ample time for what?
learning

What process can be triggered by a burst of ethylene production in the fruit?
ripening

What is a sac-like organ  that stores urine?
the urinary bladder

When the pressure waves from the scala move the basilar membrane, the tectorial membrane slides across the what?
stereocilia

What are surface currents generally caused by?
major wind belts

What helps cells take up glucose from the blood?
insulin

What is the term for potential energy due to the position of an object above earth?
gravitational potential energy

What type of engineers influence community structure through their effects on the physical environment?
ecosystem engineers

The atomic number defines the identity of what?
element

The nuclei of radioisotopes are unstable, so they constantly decay and emit what?
radiation

Parthenogenesis is the most common form of what in animals that at other times reproduce sexually?
asexual reproduction

What kind of fossils are excellent markers for correlating the ages of sedimentary rocks?
foram

Gated ion channels have a central role in what system's function?
nervous

Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called what?
electromagnetic energy

Hydrogen gas is generated by the reaction of nitric acid and what else?
elemental iron

What is the top 200 meters of water in the ocean called?
photic zone

Zinc is what kind of metal.?
active transition metal

What do decomposers release when they break down dead organisms?
nutrients

Wavelengths are described by a unit of what?
distance

Chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis are examples of which type of sti?
bacterial

Which process acts as a natural complement for cellular respiration?
photosynthesis

What are the only invertebrates that can fly?
insects

What is the term for the cell fragments involved in blood clotting, which stick to tears in blood vessels and to each other?
platelets

What celestial body is often discovered because it causes a star to move or to dim?
exoplanet

What shape is the lens of the eye?
convex

What is the change frogs and butterflies go through?
metamorphosis

What term is used to describe the attractive force between molecules of the same substance?
cohesion

Where do archea live?
everywhere

What is the 'stuff' that all things are made of?
matter

What is the change of characteristics of living things over time?
evolution

What is the si unit for electric current?
ampere

What abbreviated form refers to oxidation-reduction reactions, which are part of respiration and photosynthesis?
redox reactions

In a cell cycle, what kind of regulator molecules allow advancement to the next stage?
positive

What are kpa, atm, and mmhg measurement units for?
pressure

Each month, starting in puberty, one egg matures and is released from where?
ovary

Synostoses unite the sacral vertebrae that fuse together to form the what?
adult sacrum

What eliminates food wastes that remain after digestion takes place?
large intestine

What is the membrane that surrounds a fetus called?
amniotic sac

What is the long-term average of weather in a particular spot called?
climate

What are the three most common elements in the air we breathe?
nitrogen, oxygen and argon

Cirrus, stratus, and cumulus are the main types of what?
clouds

Lymphatic capillaries are interlaced with the arterioles and venules of which system?
cardiovascular system

What is required for communication?
transmission and reception of signals

When gametes unite during fertilization, the resulting zygote inherits two of what for each gene, one from each parent?
alleles

What provides an early, rapid, and nonspecific defense against invading pathogens?
neutrophils

In a mammal the front part of the brain is called the what?
cerebrum

What term is used to describe joints in which the bones are connected by cartilage?
cartilaginous joints

What type of tissue is made up of cells that have the unique ability to contract?
muscle tissue

Recent fossil evidence has shown that the evolutionary divergence of what group from other land animals was characterized by streamlining and simplifying the digestive system, which allowed a high metabolic rate?
birds

Probability can be used to predict the chance of gametes and offspring having certain what?
alleles

What happens to the reaction rate over the course of a reaction?
slows down

The first reported nuclear fission occurred in 1939 when three german scientists bombarded uranium-235 atoms with slow-moving what?
neutrons

What are temporary feet that protists have called?
transient pseudopodia

Predicting the possible genotypes and phenotypes from a genetic cross is often aided by a what?
punnett square

What is a relationship between organisms that strive for the same resources in the same place?
competition

What is a collection of lymphatic tissue that combines with epithelial tissue lining the mucosa throughout the body?
mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (malt)

What is the term for individuals of a species that live in a particular habitat?
population

Which gas moves from the blood in the capillaries into the air?
carbon dioxide

What makes the halogen group so diverse?
three different states of matter

What type of dating determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other but not their age in years?
relative

The timing of events in what cycle - which lasts just minutes in fruit fly embryos - is controlled by mechanisms that are both internal and external to the cell?
cell cycle

Is wind power renewable or non renewable?
renewable

What is the principal cell of connective tissues?
fibroblast

What occurs when a few individuals start, or found, a new population?
founder effect

When animals use incubation, how do they generally give birth to their young?
eggs

What two-word term refers to the number of different species in the community?
species richness

Two events are defined to be simultaneous if an observer measures them as occurring at what?
same time

The force of attraction or repulsion between charged particles is called what?
electric force

What important function do bees perform on garden plants and many commercial fruit trees?
pollination

What do ecosystems require constant inputs of?
energy

What is the final stage of aerobic respiration?
electron transport

What is the lightest molecule?
hydrogen

The genome of an organism consists of one or more what?
dna molecules

Where are free-living roundworms mainly found?
freshwater habitats

What do you call any force that makes something move in a circle?
centripetal force

The two parameters used to measure changes in ecosystems are resistance and what related factor?
resilience

In humans, the first sites used for energy storage are liver and what else?
muscle cells

What are electrons at the outermost energy level of an atom are called?
valence electrons

Reaching conclusions about unobserved things on the basis of what has already been observed is known as what kind of reasoning?
inductive

The molecular formula is still c 4 h 10 , which is the same formula as?
butane

A structure composed of two or more types of tissues that work together to perform the same function is called?
organ

All cells undergo what during a lifetime, but when this process is out of control, cancer results?
cell division

Amylase and pepsin are examples of enzymes needed for what process?
digestion

What two words describe the debate over whether behaviors are caused by genetics or by environment?
nature and nurture

Why do comet tails always point away from the sun instead of trailing behind the comet?
dust particles recoil

What is the term for the average number of individuals in a population per unit of area or volume?
population density

Gibbs free energy values can be used to determine what?
equilibrium constants

Creep, which usually takes place where the ground freezes and thaws frequently, involves movement of particles due to what force?
gravity

Which parasite causes downy mildew in grape plants?
plasmopara viticola

What property is defined as the magnitude or size of displacement between two positions?
distance

Endosperm usually develops before the what does?
embryo

What is the term for geological activity that occurs within a plate?
intraplate activity

What is a three-dimensional anticline called?
dome

Electrical energy consumed can be expressed as the product of power multiplied by what else?
time

What is the name for a substance that can be used to follow the pathway of that substance through some structure?
tracer

What do osteoclasts do to bone?
break it down

What do tube worms rely on for food?
chemosynthetic microorganisms

Size is a general feature of cell structure that relates to?
function

Altitude is height above what?
sea level

Conservation of what property of ecosystems is the aim of measures like the endangered species act?
biodiversity

Nearly all rocks are made of what?
minerals

What type of cell division produces gametes?
meiosis

Where are feces formed?
large intestine

What measurement of the wave is used to determine the magnitude of an earthquake?
height

In a food chain, only about 10 percent of what passes to the next level?
energy

In plants, a high concentration of iaa inhibits what?
cell elongation

The rate of heat transfer by radiation is largely determined by what?
color

Comparisons of amino acid sequences can shed light on the evolutionary divergence of what?
related species

How high or low a sound seems is associated with what property of the sound?
pitch

Alveolar ducts and broncioles are developing parts of what organ system?
respiratory

During photosynthesis what organelle is used by plants to change sunlight into chemical energy?
chloroplasts

Small water bodies often fed by springs are called what?
ponds

The combustion of propane gas produces carbon dioxide and what else?
water vapor

Tremetol, a metabolic poison found in the white snake root plant, prevents the metabolism of what?
lactate

Water, carbon dioxide, and what other element are important agents of chemical weathering?
oxygen

Deserts and forests are examples of what type of biome?
terrestrial

Lampreys use their sucker to feed on what part of other fish species?
blood

Nonflowering vascular plants have how many basic types of leaves?
three

Somatosensation includes all sensation received from the skin and mucous membranes, as well as from these?
limbs and joints

What is the only class of animals that has hair?
mammals

What is the muscular organ that nourishes and supports the growing embryo?
uterus

The smallest cyclic ether is called what?
epoxide

Dialysis is a medical process of removing wastes and excess water from the blood by diffusion and ultrafiltration. when kidney function fails, dialysis must be done to artificially rid the body of this?
waste and fluids

What is the study of how living things interact with each other and with their environment?
ecology

What is a continuous flow of electric charge called?
electric current

How many years can dissolved carbon be stored in the deep ocean?
thousands

What effect causes winds and currents to form circular patterns?
coriolis effect

What type of sunlight inhibits vertical growth in a plant?
direct

Why does ice wedging occur?
water expands

Are humans a new or old species on the earth?
new

What kind of surface would cause diffusion when light is reflected off of it?
rough surfaces

What are plants called that grow where you don't want them?
weeds

Who proposed that everything in the universe exerts a force of attraction on everything else?
newton

Living organisms are comprised of organic compounds, which are molecules built around what element?
carbon

Which mineral do native americans use to decorate items?
turquoise

Glycolysis oxidizes glucose to two molecules of pyruvate?
glucose

What's the most common disorder from having an extra chromosome?
down syndrome

What type of respiration does not use oxygen?
fermentation

Besides depth soundings, what else are bathymetric maps made of?
sonar data

A cell with two sets of chromosomes is called a?
diploid

On the ventral side of the embryonic disc, opposite the amnion, cells in the lower layer of the embryonic disk (the hypoblast) extend into the blastocyst cavity and form this?
yolk sac

Pairs of fish that do not practice broadcast what may exhibit courtship behavior?
spawning

The van allen radiation belts are two regions in which energetic charged particles are trapped in earth’s what?
magnetic field

What is the lowest level of organism that can perform all activities required for life?
cell

What umbrella term describes small structures that exist within cells and perform specialized functions?
organelles

What is the continental margin made of?
continental crust

What happens to gas solubility as the temperature increases?
decreases

What forms when a glacier scrapes a large hole in the ground?
glacial lake

What branch of science holds hope for developing crops with genes that help them withstand harsh conditions?
biotechnology

In eukaryotic cells, where is the dna kept?
nucleus

What is a measure of the amount of space that a substance or an object occupies?
volume

What nucleic acid stores the genetic information?
dna

Molds growing on foods are a common type of what organisms that play very important roles in almost every terrestrial ecosystem on earth?
fungi

What of a electromagnetic wave can be calculated using the wave equation due to their speed always being constant?
frequency

Because of the wave character of matter, the idea of well-defined orbits gives way to a model in which there is a cloud of what?
probability

Metabolism is controlled by regulation of what?
enzyme activity

A catalytic converter filters pollutants in exhaust created by burning what before releasing it into the air?
fossil fuels

What are the two components of the ecf?
plasma and if

A quarry, which produces rocks and minerals used to make buildings and roads, is an example of what type of mine?
open-pit mine

Along with other organelles, all eukaryotic cells possess what structure?
nucleus

The environment where most chemical reactions in organisms takes place consists mostly of what?
water

The main functions of epithelia are protection from the environment, coverage, secretion and excretion, absorption, and this?
filtration

What term is defined as the preserved remains or traces of organisms that lived during earlier ages?
fossils

What rigid external structure protects shellfish and other animals and provides points of attachment for the muscles that move the appendages?
exoskeleton

The electronic components in electronic devices, used to transmit and change electricity are made of?
semiconductors

Vaccinations are designed to boost immunity to a virus to prevent this?
infection

How many sets of chromosomes do gametes contain?
single

What is the term for the energy of motion, which is exhibited by the speed of an object?
kinetic energy

Soil that forms in place over a very long period is called what?
residual soil

Alpha and beta decay occur when a nucleus has too many protons or an unstable ratio of what?
protons to neutrons

What do you call an abnormal mass of cells that is dividing improperly?
tumor

What is an example of a biochemical lipid that contributes to weight gain?
fats

The rate that energy is released is known as
power

A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment and is called what?
background radiation

Most of the heat that enters the mesosphere comes from where?
the stratosphere

What is the natural movement called within your intestines?
peristalsis

What does the stomach produce to help digest food?
hydrochloric acid

What type of plants have vascular tissue but do not have seeds?
seedless vascular plants

After ovulation occurs, the moving “fingers” of what nearby structure sweep the egg into its tube?
fallopian tube

Alterations that change chromosome structure are known as?
mutations

Membranes will become increasingly what as temperatures rise?
fluid

Catabolism and anabolism are the two types of what?
metabolism

What types of incest behaviors are controlled by genes?
instinctive behaviors like flying and mating

What term describes a specific statement that is thought to be never violated by the entire natural universe?
scientific law

When do female reproductive organs mature?
at puberty

What are the extremely small particles that comprise all matter?
atoms

What are the two basic types of combustion engines?
external and internal combustion engines

Plasmodesmata passes through what part of plants?
cell walls

What element has an atomic number of 6?
carbon

What common sea creature can be both awake and asleep at the same time?
dolphins

What is the second stage of cellular respiration?
krebs cycle

As a battery is depleted what happens to its internal resistance?
increases

What is a condition where plants are grown in mineral solutions without soil called?
hydroponics

What is the scientific name for the human species?
homo sapiens

Snippet 3: the diploid cells resulting from karyogamy are short-lived and undergo meiosis, producing what?
haploid spores

Average speed is equal to distance divided by what?
time

When a supercooled liquid boils, the temperature drops as the liquid is converted to what?
vapor

What process produces four haploid daughter cells, each genetically unique?
meiosis

What is root that does not arise from a usual place?
adventitious

In which period of the periodic table is nickel found?
fourth period

What serves as the control center of the nervous system?
brain

What is the name for the term that describes deep ocean water rising the surface?
upwelling

What is the measure for how fast or slow something moves?
speed

What is the term for the decayed remains of living organisms?
humus

What happens when materials return to their original shape?
elastic rebound

Dna segments cross over to form what kind of chromosome?
recombinant

Typically hard, high-melting solids that conduct heat and electricity well, the transition elements have many properties in common with other what?
metals

Programmed cell death, which goes by what term, is important for removing damaged or unnecessary cells?
apoptosis

What elements do mafic minerals typically include?
iron and magnesium

During what time period did poor air quality become a problem?
industrial revolution

All living organisms must have what ability, in order to make more organisms like themselves?
reproduction

If a solute is a gas, increasing the temperature will do what?
decrease its solubility

The fetus becoming relatively large and mature before birth increases the chances of what?
survival

What item starts puberty in girls?
the hypothalamus

Protein digestion begins in the stomach as pepsinogen in gastric juice is converted to pepsin, the enzyme that hydrolyzes this?
peptide bonds

What lipid, added to certain foods to keep them fresher longer, increases the risk of heart disease?
trans fat

What occurs in a population when its allele frequencies change over time?
evolution

What do some animals use for shelter?
nonliving materials

In statistics a boundary on the precision and accuracy is known as what?
error

How many limbs do all mammals have?
four

More common in developing countries, parasitic diseases caused by roundworms often result from poor practice of what?
personal hygiene

What type of bacteria stains red?
gram-negative bacteria

The shapes of minerals form as they are broken along what planes?
cleavage planes

An atomic symbol is used to represent what?
element

Mammals can feed at various levels of food chains, as herbivores, insectivores, carnivores and what else?
omnivores

What are winds that blow over a limited area called?
local winds

Descending fibers from the cerebrum have branches that connect to neurons in the pons. those neurons project into the cerebellum, providing a copy of motor commands sent to this?
spinal cord

An element is defined by the number of ____ it contains?
protons

What term is used to describe the distance traveled divided by the time it took to travel that distance?
speed

Which gas is released by the group of archaea known as methanogens?
methane

Of the four main wobble base pairs, guanine is paired with what?
uracil

The atoms of a compound are held together by what type of bonds?
chemical

Unlike energy, what happens to matter in ecosystems?
it is recycled

The anion is the methanoate ion, which is commonly called the what?
formate ion

Drinking too much water too fast can lead to what potentially fatal condition, which causes dangerous changes to salt levels?
water intoxication

When electrons move from one atom to another, they become what?
ions

Another way to classify matter is to describe it as a solid, a liquid, or a gas, which was done in the examples of solutions. these three descriptions, each implying that the matter has certain physical properties, represent the three of these?
phases of matter

What is the health-threatening smoke exhaled by a cigarette smoker or released from tobacco products?
secondhand smoke

Why do waves travel faster through solids?
particles closer together

What is the point on the ground that is located directly above where underground rocks fracture (or the "focus" point)?
epicenter

When atoms gain or lose electrons, they can form electrically charged particles called what?
ions

What do you call a pure substance that cannot be broken down into different types of substances?
element

Natural selection can only take place if there is variation, or differences, among individuals in a population. importantly, these differences must have some genetic basis; otherwise, the selection will not lead to change in this?
next generation

The large hadron collider is the biggest type of what invention, which boosts particles to high energies?
particle accelerator

Metals, metalloids, and nonmetals are the different classes of what?
elements

What holds homologs together as the spindle forms for the first meiotic division?
chiasmata

In the periodic table, elements are arranged from left to right according to what property?
atomic mass

What is made of gases that are essential for photosynthesis and other life activities?
atmosphere

When a stream flows from a hard to  soft rock area, what is often formed?
a waterfall

What term means taking used items and materials and turning them into something new?
recycling

What lets different species of anole lizards live in the same area without competing?
specialization

What are made in the first step of the scientific method?
observations

What type of organisms do not need blood?
single-celled

What type of plants are the mosses, the hornwarts, and the liverworts considered to be?
nonvascular

Wearing what will reduce the amplitude of sound waves entering the ears?
hearing protectors

What type of motion only occurs when there is one force applied at the beginning of the trajectory after which there is no interference apart from gravity?
projectile

What type of energy is produced when two objects move together?
mechanical energy

Which form of matter assumes the shape of its container?
gas

What type of energy is possessed by autumn leaves before they fall?
potential energy

The heterotroph eats only or mainly what?
plants

All carbon atoms have how many protons?
six

The cerebellum is associated with what major human organ?
brain

The kinetic energy of a moving object depends on it's mass and it's what?
volume

Electromagnetic waves are comprised of what two types of energy?
electric and magnetic

Cranial nerves convey specific sensory information from the head and neck directly to what organ?
brain

Where are the viral enzyme and genome packaged inside?
viral capsid

What would cause warm receptors to signal the hypothalamic thermostat?
increased temperature

The direction of the force of gravity is in what direction?
straight line

Sickle-cell anemia, leukemia, lymphoma, and hemophilia are examples of what types of disease?
blood disease

In hypothesis-based science, specific results are predicted from a general premise, which is called what type of reasoning that proceeds from general to particular?
deductive

The process by which an organism develops from a single-celled zygote to a multi-cellular organism is complex and well regulated. the regulation occurs through signaling between cells and tissues and responses in the form of what?
differential gene expression

The development of specific structures in specific locations is called what?
pattern formation

An experiment generates what to support a hypothesis?
evidence

What is the outermost occupied shell of electrons in an atom.
valence shell

What ear structure has three fluid filled ducts, including the organ of corti, where sound waves in air go to vibration?
cochlea

What is the name for elements that neither contain carbon nor come from living things?
minerals

Kinetic energy is energy of this?
motion

Reproduction in prokaryotic cells is by what process of growth, enlargement and division?
binary fission

Why do some dry fruits split open at maturity?
to release seeds

What is an ionic bond in nature?
electrostatic

Most air masses form over what two types of regions?
polar and tropical

Earthworms are important deposit feeders that help form and enrich what material?
soil

Growth, morphogenesis, and cell differentiation produce the plant what?
body

What is a fold of the outer skin lining the shell called?
mantle

What sciences are the study of living organisms?
life sciences

Frogs are amphibians that live part of the time in fresh water and rest of the time where?
on land

Name the missing type of friction: static, rolling, fluid _____?
sliding

What is the study of how living organisms interact with each other and with their environment?
ecology

What are electrons lost during the formation of ions called?
cations

Making a specific statement based on a general principle is the definition of what type of reasoning?
deductive

The earth's magnetic poles have done what repeatedly in the past?
switched places

What do we call the orderly sequence of events in the life of a cell from the division of a single parent cell to produce two new daughter cells, to the subsequent division of those daughter cells?
cell cycle

What are natural resources which can be replaced in a relatively short period called?
renewable resources

The biological electron transport chain provides for an orderly, stepwise transfer of electrons. both nadh (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and fadh2 (reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide) are energy rich molecules that liberate a large amount of energy during what?
oxidation

The cells within meristems divide relatively frequently, generating additional what?
cells

Another unit of energy, used widely in the health professions and everyday life, is _______?
calorie ( cal )

What are the specfic types of proteins that determine your blood type called?
antigens

Which layer of soil experiences the most weathering?
top layer

Osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, fractures, and sprains are problems affecting what system?
skeletal system

What are typically arranged into complex tubular networks with extensive surface areas?
transport epithelia

What is the simplest unit of structure and function of all living organisms called?
cell

Activities that can reduce the effects of what condition include exercises to keep the blood and lymph flowing through affected areas?
edema

An alloy is a mixture of metals that has bulk metallic properties different from those of its what?
constituent elements

There are two types of digestion, mechanical and what else?
chemical

What is the rate at which energy is being transferred called?
power

Where does the process of assembling amino acids into a protein take place?
in the ribosome

Where can you find sodium acetate?
a heat pack

For a given amount of solute, do smaller particles have a greater or lesser surface area?
greater

What is the functional unit of compact bone?
the osteon

Mineralocorticoids are hormones synthesized by the adrenal cortex that affect what balance, by regulating sodium and water levels?
osmotic

The pulmonary circulation carries blood between what two organs?
heart and lungs

The ancient greek philosopher aristotle thought that all matter consists of just four what, which he identified as earth, air, water, and fire?
elements

What are archaea that live in extremely hot environments called?
thermophiles

Warming conditions and, perhaps, human activities contributed to what fate of many organisms of the pleistocene era?
extinction

Practical limits of van de graaff generators arise because the large electric fields polarize and eventually do what to surrounding materials?
ionize

The remainder is transferred by contraction of what before the ventricles begin to contract?
the atria

Chromatin condenses into chromosomes during prophase, the first and longest phase of what process?
mitosis

What do plants lose the most of through the stomata?
water

Unburned hydrocarbons can more easily be converted to carbon dioxide and water in the presence of a what?
catalyst

What do plasmodesmata connect to in the plant cell?
cytoplasms

What are compounds composed of only two elements called?
binary compounds

What type of gases trap heat in the atmosphere, causing earth to have a moderate temperature?
greenhouse gases

What system is the brain the control center of?
nervous

Air pollution can cause disease of what system by affecting the health of your lungs?
respiratory

Why does the body react to a loss of chloride ions?
increased bicarbonate reabsorption

The negatively charged electrons are attracted to the positively charged what?
nucleus

Most of the gray matter is on the surface of the brain, surrounding what other type of matter?
white

Cooling or evaporation of what from the sea surface makes surface water dense?
fresh water

What is the term for reproductive cells, such as sperm and egg?
gametes

What material is regularly used in human hip and knee implants?
metal

What are the most dramatic, sudden, and dangerous types of mass wasting?
landslides

What current-carrying long coil of wire acts as a magnet?
solenoid

In combination or synthesis reactions, two chemical species combine to produce a what?
new compound

The core of a star collapses during what event, forming a neutron star?
supernova

What is the term used for a large body of air of the same temperature and moisture conditions?
air mass

The loss of oxygen to the heart muscle causes that part of the tissue to what?
die

What system transports many substances to and from cells throughout the body?
cardiovascular

What consists of two or more elements and forms as a result of a chemical reaction?
compound

What is occasional chest pain known as?
angina pectoris

In the cardiovascular system, where is the ultimate destination of the oxygen-poor blood?
heart

What is the study of the energy transformations that occur in a collection of matter?
thermodynamics

Love canal was an infamous example of what type of pollution?
industrial waste dumping

What is a funnel-shaped cloud of whirling high winds known as?
tornado

Why do birds need a light-weight body?
to stay aloft

Asthma, pneumonia, and emphysema are diseases of what system?
respiratory

The “knee-jerk" motion that people involuntarily perform after being struck in the knee in a certain way is an example of what kind of behavior?
reflex

What are tiny, hair like projections?
cilia

How long does it take for the earth to make a complete rotation of its axis?
24 hours

Glaciers have been melting since what period?
pleistocene ice age

The transmission electron micrograph shows the cell walls where two cells do what?
come together

What form does water take on the planet mars?
ice

The simplest system is that of contractile vacuoles present in what?
microorganisms

Water's very polar compound causes most solutes to do what?
dissolve

Which plant group has vascular tissue, seeds, and flowers?
angiosperms

The point in front of a mirror where the reflected rays intersect is known as what?
focal point

Any unused energy in food, whether it comes from carbohydrates, proteins, or lipids, is stored in the body where?
fat

What helps determine the concentration of a species in a solution?
quantitative analysis

In order to survive and maintain what state, an organism must quickly adapt to changing environmental conditions?
homeostasis

What crust is thinner and denser than continental crust?
oceanic

What are the antibodies an animal produces after exposure to a microbial antigen?
polyclonal

How does heat travel from the sun to the earth?
thermal radiation from the sun

What were the first life forms found on earth similar to?
bacteria

Steel, bronze, and brass are examples of what?
alloys

A pacemaker uses electrical shocks to stimulate the what to beat properly?
heart

What is the cloud of  brown dust-like power that escapes when a puffball fungus is touched?
spores

What are the cone-like structures that contain sporangia called?
strobili

What are considered to be the smallest particles of matter?
atoms

The mechanics of dynein-based bending involve a process that resembles what?
walking

What type of creature is a scallop?
mollusk

The risk of what is raised by overexposure to the sun?
skin cancer

Which artery enters the cranium through the carotid canal in the temporal bone?
internal carotid artery

How are aquatic biomes often classified?
amount of salt

What is the most abundant type of biological entity on the earth?
viruses

What is the most diverse and abundant group of organisms on earth, numbering in the millions of trillions?
bacteria

What kind of hormones are secreted by organs classified as gonads?
sex hormones

An oxy-acetylene torch is an effective way to cut what?
metal

What are the infoldings of the inner membrane called?
cristae

A channel protein is an example of what type of protein?
transport proteins

Eight of the hottest years on record have occurred since what year?
1998

Average acceleration is the rate of change of what?
velocity

What is studied to understand gene expression patterns in cells?
rna

Ribosomes are produced in the nucleolus, and then transported to the what?
cytoplasm

Ecosystem dynamics include more than the flow of energy and recycling of matter. ecosystems are also dynamic because they?
change through time

Muscle contraction requires repeated cycles of binding and what?
release

An important chemical compound, which supplies living things with the energy they need to survive, is composed of carbon, oxygen and atoms of what other element?
hydrogen

What are the glands that secrete milk in a woman's breasts?
mammary glands

Like a thick cap covering the brain, the dura mater is a tough outer covering. the name comes from the latin for?
tough mother

Which organisms get their energy source and carbon source from organic sources?
chemoheterotrophs

What natural disaster is california most linked with?
earthquakes

Small crustaceans exchange gases across thin areas of the cuticle; larger species have what to accomplish this?
gills

The superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava are veins that return blood lacking what to the heart?
oxygen

There are only four possible bases that make up each dna nucleotide: adenine, guanine, thymine, and?
cytosine

What affects the boiling point of water?
external pressure

The average length of a woman’s menstrual cycle is what?
28 days

Water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as what?
outflow

What is a biochemical compound that is a chain of amino acids called?
proteins

Each what is made of two identical sister chromatids?
chromosome

Amino groups are found within amino acids, nicknamed the building blocks of what?
proteins

What is the name of earth’s only natural satellite?
moon

Which is the lightest of the widely used structural metals?
magnesium

When lava flows over a large area and cools, it creates a large, flat surface of what type of rock?
igneous

Examples of what process are evident in many biological systems because cells are surrounded by semipermeable membranes?
osmosis

What does cartilage lack compared to bones, making it softer and less rigid?
calcium

What three forms does frozen precipitation take?
snow, sleet, freezing rain

What is a stream of moving water that flows through the ocean?
current

The elbow is an example of a what type of joint?
hinge joint

The first leaves of most ferns appear curled up into what?
fiddleheads

Electrophiles have a strong tendency to react with what?
nucleophiles

What layered form of carbon is used as a lubricant and in pencils?
graphite

What kind of solids have particles that are arranged in a regular repeating pattern?
crystalline solids

During what in the small intestine do rings of smooth muscle repeatedly contract and then relax?
segmentation

Acetyl-coa is formed from the breakdown of carbohydrates, lipids, and what else?
proteins

Juvenile hormone modulates the activity of what?
ecdysteroid

What causes the red color of laterite soils?
iron oxides

The scientific process of collecting data outside the lab (in the "wild") is known as what kind of work?
field work

Red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, and plasma are all components of what fluid?
blood

Who created the idea of an evolutionary tree to represent the relationships between different species and their common ancestors?
charles darwin

What organs absorb water and nutrients from the soil?
roots

What does magma that cools underground form?
instrusions

Which season is moist, causing the most thunderstorms?
summer

What are the two hormones primarily responsible for maintaining homeostasis of blood glucose levels?
insulin and glucagon

What important process takes place in specialized tissue inside plant leaves?
photosynthesis

What type of plants were the first to evolve?
nonvascular

In multicellular organisms, specialized cells may be organized into what, which in turn may be organized into organs?
tissues

What are accessory digestive organs critical for breaking down?
food

The direction of prevailing winds determines the type of what that usually moves over an area?
air mass

As blood glucose levels rise what is released from the pancreas?
insulin

Hydrocarbons are combined with oxygen in a series of enzymatic steps to product water, carbon dioxide, and energy, which is stored in the form of what?
reactive molecules

The validity of thought experiments, of course, is determined by this?
actual observation

What do you call a close relationship between two species that benefits both?
symbiotic relationship

Generators convert mechanical energy to which kind?
electrical

What is common in two eukaryotic proteins?
one domain

What do you call egg-shaped galaxies, which are reddish to yellowish in color because they contain mostly old stars?
elliptical galaxies

When it was found that, without the force of gravity exerting pressure on the bones, bone mass was lost in astronauts, what kind of exercise provided an antidote?
resistive

What can occur during periods of heavy rain?
floods

What type of energy can be used to change the position or shape of an object, thus giving it potential energy?
kinetic energy

What equals the output power divided by the input power?
efficiency

Overpopulation takes place when the number of organisms in an area exceeds what?
carrying capacity

There are six fundamentally different kinds of nuclear decay reactions, and each releases a different kind of particle or what?
energy

What is the only metal that is a liquid at room temperature?
mercury

Heart valves prevent what kind of blood flow from happening in the heart?
backflow

What is the source of energy for photosynthesis?
light

Different types of interference include destructive and what else?
constructive

What is anything that causes cancer called?
carcinogen

In comparing two solutions of unequal solute concentration, the solution with the higher solute concentration is called what?
hypertonic

What broad group of animals - which includes rats, dogs and camels - have highly developed brains and often perform work for humans?
mammals

What term describes a way that small molecules or ions move across the cell membrane without input of energy by the cell?
passive transport

Do most humans feed at one trophic level, or more than one?
more than one

What is it called when two waves combine to create a larger wave?
constructive interference

What is the study of the relationship between electricity and chemical reactions called?
electrochemistry

What is the term for expelling air out of the body through the nose or mouth?
exhalation

The lowest resonant frequency is called the what?
fundamental

Body waves and surface waves are the two major types of what, which occur during earthquakes?
seismic waves

Inferior rotation occurs during limb adduction and involves the downward motion of what?
glenoid cavity

The speed of an electromagnetic wave is the product of its wavelength and what else?
frequency

Electrons in inner shells are called what?
core electrons

The binding of complementary bases allows dna molecules to take their well-known shape, called a what?
double helix

What are the only amphibians without legs?
caecilians

Plants, fungi, bacteria and archaea cells all have what feature that keeps them rigid that animal cells do not have?
cell walls

What type of interspecies relationship involves one party being actively harmed?
parasitism

Which nervous system consists of all the nervous tissue that lies outside the central nervous system?
peripheral nervous system

What do organisms use to grow and repair themselves?
cell division

The afferent arterioles service about 1.3 million of what in each kidney?
nephrons

Kyphosis, lordosis, and scoliosis are all diseases involving improper curvature of which bodily structure (which is supposed to be curved in a certain way anyway)?
spine

What do herbivores eat?
plants

What important aspect of the scientific method is a suggested explanation for an event, which can be tested?
hypothesis

What distant and extraordinarily energetic objects now seem to be early stages of galactic evolution with a supermassive black-hole-devouring material?
quasars

Which gland is an extension of the hypothalamus?
posterior pituitary gland

Energy often changes between potential and what other kind of energy?
kinetic

As the prokaryotic cell size increases, what happens to its surface area-to-volume ratio?
decreases

Why are seeds of a pine cone easily carried by the wind and dispersed?
seeds have wings

What do dendrites from the cell body recieve impulses from?
other neurons

During what are deletions and duplications especially likely to occur?
meiosis

What causes maple leaves to change their colors?
chemical reactions

The cell body contains what central structure along with other organelles?
nucleus

What is the term for the number that describes an electron's orbital orientation in space?
magnetic quantum number

Where do most red algae species live?
oceans

What term is used for darwin's idea that in stable geologic and climatic conditions evolution occurred gradually?
gradualism

What element is all life built around?
carbon

What are seamounts that rise above the water surface called?
islands

Though often regarded as the supporting cast of the nervous system, glial cells in the brain actually outnumber what by a factor of ten?
neurons

Dinosaurs filled the niches that mammals fill today during which era?
mesozoic

The magnet field of earth is called what?
magnetosphere

What two types of hormones regulate mammalian reproduction?
tropic and sex

In addition to five classes of fish, what other classes make up the species of vertebrates?
amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals

What is the method of reproduction for echinoderms?
external fertilization

What is happening to the rate of the expansion of the universe?
it is increasing

What are required when the damage from trauma or infection cannot be closed with sutures or staples?
skin grafts

In addition to a vibrating electric field what does an electromagnetic wave consist of?
magnetic field

What type of bones serve as points of attachment for muscles and often protect internal organs?
flat bones

The presence of what stratospheric gas layer decreases the frequency of skin cancer and other damaging effects of ultraviolet radiation?
ozone

The characteristic sound of a motorcycle buzzing by is an example of which effect?
doppler effect

What protects the scalp from ultraviolet light exposure and loss of body heat?
head hair

What is the name given to the use of controlled nuclear fusion as an energy source?
thermonuclear power

Some compounds containing hydrogen are members of an important class of substances known as what?
acids

In which organ are bile acids made
liver

What is the layer of electrons that encircle the nucleus at a distinct energy level called?
electron shell

What is the most common way to classify stars?
by color

What is a homogeneous mixture also known as?
solution

Living organisms are made up of what type of carbon-based compounds?
biochemical

What classification system was developed by a swedish botanist trying to classify all known living things?
linnaean system

The word science is derived from what latin word?
scentia

In a model of an atom, the level with the least energy is the one closest to what?
nucleus

What is the process of making atp without oxygen called?
fermentation

What is the type of mining called when materials are removed along a strip?
strip mining

Chlorine is a nonmetal and gains one electron in becoming a what?
anion

The most common mode of asexual reproduction is through the formation of asexual these?
spores

Some species of fish carry their fertilized eggs in their mouth until they hatch; this is called what?
mouth brooding

In a chemical reaction, what, in general, comes together in order to form a product?
reactants

What decides what may enter or leave a cell?
cell membrane

What trophic level are secondary consumers (which eat primary consumers) considered to be?
trophic level 3

What type of map projection is used for small areas to avoid distortion?
gnomic projection

What do atoms form by sharing valence electrons?
covalent bonds

What is the process that moves particles by rolling or dragging along the bottom of the water?
traction

Alkenes react with what to form dihalides?
halogens

A supervolcano that may have killed all but 10,000 humans resulted in what phenomenon, lasting up to a decade?
volcanic winter

The existence of the plasma membrane was identified in the 1890s, and its chemical components were identified in 1915. the principal components identified at that time were these?
lipids and proteins

Acting like drawstrings to close off the alimentary canal, what regulates the passage of material between compartments?
sphincter

What man-made substance tends to break down ozone in the stratosphere?
cfcs

What in saliva protects the lining of the mouth from abrasion and lubricates food for easier swallowing?
mucus

Which latitudes get the most energy from the sun?
lowest latitudes

Extended stays in zero gravity are not healthy for human beings. thus, for the comfort of the astronauts, the station is rotated so that the astronauts feel there is what?
internal gravity

What parts of the planet does solar energy have difficulty reaching?
poles

Oceans are made of a solution of what?
salt and water

Although humans require it, what accounts for just one percent of all water on earth?
fresh water

Arachidic, stearic, and palmitic fatty acids are examples of what type of fatty acid?
saturated

Weather maps show storms, air masses, and what?
fronts

What is a pure substance called?
an element

What term describes the energy of an object that is moving or has the potential to move?
mechanical energy

Evidence for the presence of what on mars makes scientists think that life might have existed there in the past?
water

What does photosynthesis allow plants to generate?
organic molecules

How many low and high tides occur per day?
two

What makes up most of the inside of a plant?
ground tissue

The first living cells may have evolved around how long ago?
4 billion years

What kind of relay occurs between the uterus, hypothalamus, and the posterior pituitary to assure an adequate supply of the hormone oxytocin during childbirth?
positive feedback

What type of plants do not typically require deep roots or woody stems?
aquatic plants

What is the key to the demographic transition?
reduced family size

For the nervous system to function, neurons must be able to send and receive what?
signals

Molecules move from an area of high concentration to an area of lower concentration until an what is met?
equilibrium

What type of layers do animals' tissues develop from?
embryonic

Vectors along the same line can be what to one another like ordinary numbers?
added

As a cell grows, its volume increases more quickly than its what?
surface area

What is the term for an antibody that inappropriately marks self-components as foreign?
autoantibody

What type of orbit do the planets make in the solar system?
elliptical

In which part of the ear are  the vibrations amplified by the malleus, incus, and stapes?
middle ear

What landform occurs most often along plate boundaries?
volcanoes

Which type of glaciers form several unique features through erosion, including cirques, arêtes, and horns?
valley glaciers

What are the strongest chemical bonds?
covalent and ionic bonds

Bacteria break down the remains of digested food through a processed called what?
fermentation

What is the term for the process in which water vapor changes to tiny droplets of liquid water?
condensation

Specialized features of populations of galápagos finches inspired what theory?
evolution by natural selection

In the equation for pressure, how is force expressed?
newtons

The radiocarpal and midcarpal joints are responsible for all movements of the hand and what other part of the body?
wrist

Psip can be positive or negative relative to what kind of pressure?
atmospheric

Lava erupts through long cracks in the ground, also called what?
fissures

What is the smallest aromatic hydrocarbon?
benzene

Which type of tree loses its leaves each fall and remains leafless in the winter?
deciduous

Water is a versatile solvent that can dissolve many ionic and polar molecular solutes to make what?
aqueous solutions

Cigarettes are a major source of what kind of chemical substances linked with cancer?
carcinogens

Does the force of magnetism increase or decrease as the distance between objects increases?
decrease

What evolutionary concept emphasizes reproductive isolation?
biological species concept

What do you call the transfer of thermal energy between particles of matter that are touching?
conduction

What's the term for a cyclic hydrocarbon with a carbon-carbon triple bond?
cycloalkyne

Osmosis is driven by the imbalance of what?
water concentration

Chromosomes consist of what material made up of strings of dna?
chromatin

Are scissors simple or compound machines?
compound

What type of isotopes have short half-lives and are given in very low doses?
radioisotopes

What is the multi-phase process in which the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell divides?
mitosis

What are microscopic vessels with very thin, porous walls?
capillaries

Which part of a fish helps them breathe?
gills

What produces hormones referred to as thymosins, which contribute to the development of the immune response in infants?
thymus

Some of the biggest waves occur with what type of storm that forms over the ocean and brings high winds?
hurricane

In many species, display behaviors, like a gorilla beating on its chest, are used instead of actual physical attacks to show what?
aggression

What are the two types of vascular tissue?
xylem and phloem

Because heterotrophs cannot make their own food, what are they called?
consumers

Nucleic acids contain the information needed for cells to make what?
proteins

Unlike corals, jellyfish spend most of their lives as what?
medusae

What are materials that eject electrons when illuminated with light called?
photoemissive

Hfcs are used as a replacement for what?
cfcs

What has the burning of fossil fuels increased in the atmosphere?
carbon dioxide

In humans, the sperm cell is the only cell with what structure that enables motility?
flagella

Dispersal occurs only on what time scale?
evolutionary

What type of feedback intensifies a change in the body’s physiological condition rather than reversing it?
positive feedback

What law explains why some objects float and some sink.
archimedes' law

What is the force of gravity called?
weight

The structure of the human tail bone is called what?
a vestigial structure

Of course, a net external force is needed to cause any acceleration, just as newton proposed in his second law of what?
motion

The oldest fossil of land plants date back how many millions of years?
470 million years

What do young female meerkats act as in colonies?
babysitters

Since europeans settled in the united states, about what percentage of topsoil has eroded away?
33 percent

What is first year after birth is called?
infancy

What do you call a substance that cannot be separated into smaller pieces, which is also defined by the number of protons it has?
element

A protective coating of zinc to prevent corrosion is applied to steel and other metals labeled what?
galvanized

How do bacteria reproduce?
binary fission

The pituitary gland is associated with what bodily system?
endocrine

Why is it necessary to maintain proper levels of cations in intercellular fluids?
keep cells healthy

Evolving from a single common ancestor, what group of organisms was perhaps the dominant life form on earth 250 million years ago?
fungi

What two forms can fluids take?
liquid or gas

What are ionic compounds that produce hydroxide ions when dissolved in water?
bases

When do end portions of two nonsister chromatids trade places?
at every crossover

Through which part of the body do most animals take in oxygen?
mouth

Magma can be created when temperature rises, pressure lowers, or what else is added?
water

What is the rotational equivalent of a force?
torque

What happens when when the immune system does not work properly?
immunodeficiency

What is the beneficial function to the body of sweating?
regulating body temperature

What type of microscope is used to see extremely small objects?
electron microscope

What is the most prevalent gas in the atmosphere, but not the most vital for life?
nitrogen

Why wouldn't a teakettle have an aluminum handle?
it conducts heat

What can help scientist gather information for an investigation?
observations

What do we call the region on the lung root formed by the entrance of the nerves at the hilum?
pulmonary plexus

Both oxygen and glucose are transported within the body via what?
blood

An increase in the body's cholesterol levels can lead to your arteries filling with what?
plaque

After citric acid forms, it goes through a series of reactions that release what, which is then captured in special molecules?
energy

All chemical changes involve a transfer of what?
energy

The normal response of the respiratory system to elevated ph is to increase the amount of what in the blood?
co2

What part of an atom is electrically neutral?
neutrons

Bar, circle, and line are all types of what?
graphs

Unlike eukaryotic cells, dna and rna synthesis in prokaryotic cells occurs together with synthesis of what?
protein

What type of bacteria are sometimes used as weapons of bioterrorism?
pathogenic

What is the name of a joint in which one bone rotates in relation to another bone?
pivot joint

Cirrus, stratus, and cumulus are types of what?
clouds

What is a buildup of electric charges on objects?
static

Where do you find the greatest biodiversity?
in the tropics

The ostwald process is the commercial method for producing what?
nitric acid

What includes the bones and cartilage?
skeleton

What type of constraints are placed on technological design?
physical and social

What cycle is the second stage of cellular respiration?
krebs cycle

What phenomenon can cause a protein in an organism to be made incorrectly?
mutation

What are mid-wavelength electromagnetic waves commonly referred to as?
light

Bronchial tubes in the lungs branch into ever-smaller structures, finally ending in alveoli. the alveoli act like what?
tiny bubbles

What can be used to accelerate the rate at which chemical reactions occur?
enzymes

Air temperature changes as what increases?
altitude

What happens to energy in a closed system?
is conserved

What are magnetites naturally attracted to?
iron

The visceral senses are most often below the limit of conscious perception because they are involved in this?
homeostatic regulation

The ideal gas law does not require that the properties of what?
gas change

Vertebrates lacking what structures often use lungs for gas exchange?
gills

What "kind" of water may take longer to become contaminated than surface water, while the natural cleaning process may take longer?
groundwater

Long-term storage of what element occurs when matter from living organisms is buried deep underground and becomes fossilized?
carbon

Electron configurations are a shorthand method of indicating what subshells electrons occupy in these?
atoms

Light emitted by atoms is polychromatic—containing more than one of these?
wavelength

What fatty material inside arteries can restrict blood flow in the artery?
plaque

What is used to record seismic waves?
seismograph

What does a solar power plant turn sunlight into?
electricity

Moving electrons have a form of kinetic energy called what?
electrical energy

Sunlight contains many different wavelengths, which you see when they separate into what?
rainbow

The study of how organisms develop is known as?
embryology

What type of force always opposes the direction of motion?
kinetic friction

What kind of energy is released when the nucleus of an atom is split?
nuclear

When did we learn there was a hole in the ozone layer?
1980s

What type of generators use electromagnetic induction to change kinetic energy to electrical energy?
electric generators

In the simple cubic system, the atoms or ions are located in which part of the cell?
corners

What are the earliest and simplest vertebrates?
fish

Behaviors are responses to stimuli. they can either be instinctual/innate behaviors, which are not influenced by the environment, or learned behaviors, which are influenced by this?
environmental changes

Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria are distinguished by thickness of what?
cell wall

What is common in muscles that have become exhausted by use?
lactic acid fermentation

What is another term for the early larval stage of a frog?
tadpole

The release of an egg from an ovary, is part of what cycle?
menstrual

Which part of the body shows does horner's syndrome affect?
one eye

In which way to vertebrates reproduces?
sexually

What contains more calcium than any other organ?
bones

One of the main features all vetebrates have in common is what?
backbone

Cytoplasmic determinants are distributed how in unfertilized eggs?
unevenly

What relatively new addition to and highest level of the system of taxonomic classification includes just three divisions, the eukarya, the archaea, and the bacteria?
domain

What is only effective if ventilation is matched to blood flow through alveolar capillaries?
breathing control

What sprouts up on stalks from the bed of moss gametophytes?
sporophytes

Like all chordates, vertebrates are animals with four defining traits, at least during which stage?
embryonic

What occurs when two waves combine and cancel each other out?
destructive interference

What occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs, or lowest points, of another wave?
destructive interference

What system in both males and females consists of structures that produce reproductive cells, or gametes, and secrete sex hormone?
reproductive

What type of creature is noted for having its eyes at the tips of stalks or tentacles that emerge from its head?
gastropods

What were the first animals to have true lungs and limbs for life on land?
amphibians

What do they call 2,2,4-trimethylpentane in the gasoline industry?
isooctane

What do we call any way that animals act, either alone or with other animals.
animal behavior

When waves of two different frequencies interfere, what phenomenon occurs?
beating

Further transformation occurs during organogenesis, the formation of what?
organs

Each antibody can bind with just one specific type of what, resulting in a signal for a phagocyte to destroy them?
antigen

What kind of surface temperature is found on venus?
extremely high

What type of resource is limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years?
natural resource

The name of the cation comes first, followed by the name of the anion, in what kind of compound?
ionic compound

Electromagnetic radiation is a form of what?
energy

What are the cells or structures that detect sensations?
receptors

What artificial process involves making an exact copy of a gene?
gene cloning

Deer ticks are the vectors for what disease that affects humans?
lyme disease

A highway that switches back and forth as it climbs up a steep hillside, yeilding a much gentler slope, is an example of what simple machine?
inclined plane

The loss of too much blood may lead to shock of what system?
circulatory

What is the tectonic zone called where two plates come together?
convergent boundary

The mild oxidation of thiols gives compounds called what?
disulfides

What is the structure in a diploid sporophyte that undergoes meiosis to form haploid spores?
sporangium

Gene expression and what else are usually considered the same molecular process?
protein synthesis

Centipedes have what on their foremost trunk segment, used to paralyze prey and aid in defense?
poison claws

What paired organs together receive about 25 percent of cardiac output and are protected in the retroperitoneal space by the renal fat pad and overlying ribs and muscle?
kidneys

The diversity of life on earth today is the result of what?
evolution

In science, coefficients are used to balance what kind of equations?
chemical

What connection is required for a newborn baby to begin breathing?
connection to the placenta

How is population density expressed?
number per area

Type 1 diabetes results in the  pancreas not being able to make what ?
insulin

Photosynthesis produces oxygen as a byproduct, and respiration produces what as a byproduct?
carbon dioxide

Volcanoes are termed active, dormant, or extinct depending on the possibility of the presence of what in chamber structures?
magma

Ciliary muscles control the shape of the lens, which bends light and focuses it on what?
the retina

Convection in which part of the earth drives the movement of the plates of lithosphere over the earth’s surface?
mantle

Simple eyes, like the human eye, have how many lenses?
one

What are the most advanced group of seedless vascular plants called?
ferns

What is a rigid layer that surrounds the plasma membrane of a plant cell?
the cell wall

A tropism where light is the stimulus is known as what?
phototropism

What is transmitted that makes up the electromagnetic spectrum?
electromagnetic radiation in different wavelengths

Rust is an example of the reaction of oxygen with what?
iron

When the sun is below the horizon and thus not visible on a direct line, the light path will bend slightly and thus make the sun visible by what?
refraction

What term describes a drug that has an effect on the central nervous system?
psychoactive drug

What is the physical area where a specie lives?
habitat

Where does most geologic activity take place?
plate boundaries

What type of winds move the same way as mountain and valley breezes?
katabatic winds

What is the term for the length of the route between two points?
distance

An individual with down's syndrome has 47 of what instead of the normal 46?
chromosomes

Where is the fruiting body normally produced in relation to the food source?
at the surface

What is the largest of the sinuses?
superior sagittal sinus

As the temperature of water decreases what happens to the speed of the water molecules?
slow down

Amines are weak bases due to the presence of a lone pair of what on the nitrogen atom?
electrons

Muscle groups are controlled by what mechanism?
motor cortex

Deficiency of what mineral causes bones to become porous and weak?
calcium

What is the apparatus used for carrying out an electrolysis reaction called?
electrolytic cell

After what life stage does the fusion inside a star end?
red giant

What color is neptune?
blue

What is it called when large objects are broken down into smaller pieces?
weathering

What is the term for species in symbiotic relationships evolving together?
coevolution

Hemoglobin, with four polypeptide chains or subunits, is the most frequently cited example of a protein having what kind of structure?
quaternary

What causes blood vessels to grow toward the tumour in cancer cells?
signaling molecules

What is igneous rock created from?
magma cooling

What is the exchange of gases between the body and outside air?
respiration

What type of metal is a good conductor of electricity?
copper

What is the study of ecosystems?
ecology

Where do sperm go after leaving the testicles and before entering the vas deferens?
epididymis

What theory brings together continental drift and seafloor spreading?
theory of plate tectonics

Different forms of the same element are called what?
allotropes

What is the  only marsupial in north america?
oppossum

What is the generation of electricity using photovoltaic cells to split water molecules called?
photoelectrolysis

What does the color of soil indicate?
fertility

What kind of charge does a neutron have?
neutral

But a point mutation can also change a codon for an amino acid into a what?
stop codon

The location of an object in a frame of reference is called what?
position

What kind of change causes evolution in population?
allele frequency changes

What type of lipids contain the element phosphorus, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen?
phospholipids

Photosynthesis requires light, water and what else?
carbon dioxide

Tropical rainforest, temperate grassland, and tundra are examples of what type of biomes?
terrestrial

What is described by the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution?
ph

Which theory states that all organisms are composed of one or more cells, the cell is the basic unit of life, and new cells arise from existing cells?
unified cell theory

Light retains its original color under water because what remains the same when light is refracted?
frequency

What are interferons?
cytokines

What is the air that remains after a forced exhalation called?
residual volume

What is the term for a gas that completely abides by the kinetic-molecular theory?
ideal gas

What is required to partially overcome the attractive forces between molecules in a solid to form a liquid?
energy

Cephalochordates have a notochord and nerve cord but not a?
backbone

Name the physicist who discovered radioactivity?
antoine henri becquerel

Researchers have identified the receptor proteins for all of the tastes except which?
salty

What has high surface tension because of extensive hydrogen bonding?
water

Where are sponges most likely anchored to?
reef or rock

What do jellyfish use to startle predators?
visible light

What do corals secrete that builds up to become a coral reef?
exoskeleton

What layer covers the bones that make them look tough, shiny, and white?
periosteum

John dalton thought that what unit, which means "indivisible", could not be divided into smaller, simpler particles?
atom

What gems are created by mollusks, such as oysters?
pearls

Extrusive igneous rocks are also called what?
volcanic rocks

What happened to chemical reactions when temperature increases?
it became faster

Where do living things obtain the energy to carry out all life processes?
food

What is another term for all eukaryotic organisms that are neither animals, nor plants, nor fungi?
protists

Tissues of marine bony fishes gain what from their surroundings?
excess salts

When magma reaches the surface through cracks in the earth's crust, what occurs?
volcanic eruption

The peripheral nervous system consists of all the nerves that are found outside what?
central nervous system

Where is gabbro found?
oceanic crust

Mypyramid features colored bands that represent what?
food groups

Which type of diseases do antibiotics treat?
bacterial diseases

What is the loss of energy available to do work called?
entropy

What do you call the gently sloped ocean floor nearest the edges of continents?
continental shelf

What uses oxygen gas to break apart the carbon-hydrogen bonds in glucose and release their energy?
cellular respiration

Which human body system system moves nutrients and other substances throughout the body?
cardiovascular system

An elastic collision is one that conserves internal energy of what type?
kinetic

What term refers to an animal that sleeps during the day and is active at night?
nocturnal

What do you call a period when temperatures are cooler than normal, causing glaciers to spread?
ice age

Every object is attracted to every other object by what force?
gravity

What begins when an oogonium with the diploid number of chromosomes undergoes mitosis?
oogenesis

What is the most abundant element in the universe?
hydrogen

If the electromagnetic repulsion between protons is greater than the strong nuclear force of attraction between them, what do they become?
unstable, or radioactive

What disease, caused by vitamin c deficiency, causes bleeding gums, nosebleeds, and other symptoms?
scurvy

What type of waves are the slowest of all seismic waves?
surface waves

What are the two types of optical telescopes?
reflecting and refracting

What can be hard or even impossible to perform in a scientific sense?
experiments

In contrast to mammals and birds, freshwater fishes produce large volumes of very dilute what?
urine

What is the matter through which sound waves travel?
medium

Polygenic traits result in a distribution that resembles a curve.  what is the shape of the curve?
bell-shaped

Since eddy currents and magnetic damping occur only in conductors, recycling centers can use these to separate metals from other materials?
magnets

Most plates are made up of a combination of what?
continental and oceanic lithosphere

Chromosomes further condensed in which stage?
diakinesis stage

What weak base is applied as an agricultural fertilizer in its pure form and is diluted to make a household cleanser?
ammonia

During the winter, production of what amine involved in the sleep-wake cycle may be affected by less sunlight hours?
melatonin

What is the term for the small particles that rocks are worn down to by water and wind?
sediments

Physical properties are characteristics that describe what as it exists?
matter

What allows for a large and mature fetus before birth,  resulting from a long period of fetal growth in the uterus?
the placenta

What type of bonds form only between metals and nonmetals?
ionic bonds

A system is said to be in stable equilibrium if, when displaced from equilibrium, it experiences a net force or torque in a direction opposite to the direction of the what?
displacement

What cycle completes the breakdown of glucose begun in glycolysis?
krebs

What do we call the full range of electromagnetic waves?
electromagnetic spectrum

What kind of light ranges from red to violet?
visible light

All matter in the universe is composed of one or more unique pure substances called what?
elements

What are the smallest type of blood vessels?
capillaries

Athletes such as swimmers and bicyclists wear body suits in competition to minimize what forces?
drag forces

During strenuous exercise our muscles perform what kind of fermentation?
lactic acid

What force causes waves to topple over and break on the shore?
friction

What type of simple machine is a seesaw an example of?
lever

What part of a sample can be represented by the mean, median, and mode?
central tendency

Arteries have thinner wall layers and valves and move blood by the action of skeletal what?
muscle

The fetal stage begins about how long after fertilization?
two months

Which is the best way to maintain a strong, fit body?
a healthy diet

Which system refers to the skin and its accessory structures?
integumentary system

Normally, only traces of protein are found in urine, and when higher amounts are found, damage to what is the likely cause?
glomeruli

What is the nickname of the best-known geyser in the world, which erupts reliably every 90 minutes?
old faithful

The two general types of reproduction are sexual and what?
asexual

Acid rain is corrosive rain caused by rainwater falling to the ground through which gas?
sulfur dioxide

What is the net force when two forces act in the same direction?
sum of the forces

What hypothesis states that the biosphere is its own living organism
the gaia hypothesis

The planet neptune has strange dark spots that sometimes appear on its surface?  what are these spots?
storms

The thalamus acts as a gateway to and from what?
cortex

When describing motion, what factor is just as important as distance?
direction

What often relies on cooperation between the motor and autonomic nervous systems?
homeostasis

What nerves are connected to the spinal cord?
spinal nerves

What source of water pollution picks up chemicals from the ground with water and carries them to bodies of water?
runoff

Where do all cells come from?
pre-existing cells

What is the term for learning from past experiences and reasoning?
insight learning

Science is the process of knowing about the natural universe through observation and this?
experiment

What type of plant keeps it green leaves year-round?
evergreen plant

What are reactions that can occur only in one direction called?
irreversible

What is the diffusion of water molecules across a semipermeable membrane?
osmosis

What forms when there is a difference in temperature between the land and the air?
fog

What domain-level category of cells can contain more than 1000 times the dna found in a typical bacterial cell?
eukaryotic

What gas is released by burning of fossil fuels and contributes to global warming?
carbon dioxide

A major disturbance in what results in an episode of severe weather called a storm?
the atmosphere

Bone marrow, the thymus gland, the spleen, and the tonsils are organs in what body system?
immune system

What term refers to the balance, or equilibrium, within the cell or a body, and an organism’s ability to keep a constant internal environment?
homeostasis

Atoms of different elements can combine in simple whole number ratios to form what?
chemical compounds

What blood component serves both structural and molecular functions in blood clotting?
platelets

What type of reproduction begins when an egg and sperm combine?
sexual reproduction

What are long chains of amino acids?
proteins

What phase exists when all the water in a container has physical properties intermediate between those of the gaseous and liquid states?
supercritical fluid

What do you call the movement of a substance from an area of a higher amount toward an area of lower amount?
diffusion

Each myofibril is made up of two types of proteins, called actin and what?
myosin

If the experimental value is less than the accepted value, the error is what?
negative

According to which process, sublevels and orbitals are filled with electrons in order of increasing energy?
aufbau

The roughness of interacting surfaces and the magnitude of force pushing one object onto another are two factors related to what force?
friction

How many types of leptons are there?
six

Plants, algae and bacteria are all examples of what type of organism?
photosynthetic

What forms after air cools below its dew point?
fog

In hornworts, the horns are the sporophytes that rise up from what?
the leaflike gametophyte

What generally sets the direction that technology takes?
problems of society

Living things that feed on others are generally known as what?
consumers

What is an isotope that is radioactive called?
radioisotopes

What is a compound that can form ions when it dissolves in water called?
electrolyte

When using a generator, we are transforming what energy into what energy?
kinetic into electrical

What kind of resource is soil?
renewable

What is the term for the stalk connecting a leaf to a stem?
petiole

What are the specialized cells within the brain called?
neurons

What stimulates the production of milk by the mammary glands following childbirth?
prolactin

In vascular plants, the sporophyte generation is what?
dominant

What organ system transports blood through the body and to and from the lungs?
circulatory

"cardio" has become slang for what type of exercise that raises your heart rate for an extended amount of time?
aerobic

How many protons do all atoms of a particular element have in their nuclei?
same number

One of the five fundamental conservation laws in the universe refers to conservation of what, which is the product of mass and velocity?
momentum

Copper oxide is a result of what two substances mixing?
copper and oxygen

The process of getting oxygen into the body and releasing carbon dioxide is called?
respiration

Someone who believes something despite the evidence is referred to by what term that references a false belief about our planet?
flat-earther

Which cells continue the digestion and absorption of nutrients and transport these nutrients to the lymphatic and circulatory systems?
epithelial cells

Pressure is defined as the force per unit area on?
surface

What do body cells use for energy?
sugars

What force pulls people and objects toward the center of the earth?
gravity

The rate of decay of carbon-14 does what over time?
remains stable

What behavior includes all the ways that animals interact with each other and the environment?
animal behavior

Food chains carry energy from what group to what group?
producers to consumers

What are professionals in technology are generally called ?
engineers

What force occurs whenever two surfaces come into contact?
friction

The anatomy of primate eyes shows they tend to rely more on vision than what sense, which is dominant in many other mammals?
smell

What are sensory cells?
specialized neurons or epithelial cells

What is it called when waves interact with other waves?
wave interference

What is the ph level for pure water?
ph of 7

What is vital for nervous system functions that include muscle stimulation, memory formation, and learning?
acetylcholine

The benthic zone is found at the bottom of all of what type of biomes?
aquatic

The hydroxyl radical is highly reactive because it has what?
unpaired electron

Gametes swim with the aid of what structure to the female gametangium, and fertilization ensues?
flagella

A phospholipid is a bond between the glycerol component of a lipid and what else?
phosphorous molecule

What connects the fetus to the placenta?
umbilical cord

In desert cactus, thorns that protect the water held in a large, barrel-shaped stem are an example of what?
adaptation

What are the most common dietary lipids?
triglycerides

What process is the opposite of fusion and releases energy only when heavy nuclei are split?
fission

Visible light is the narrow segment of what, to which the normal human eye responds?
electromagnetic spectrum

Bromine is much less abundant than fluorine or chlorine, but it is easily recovered from seawater, which contains about 65 mg of br− per what?
liter

Karyotyping shows whether what structures, which contain genetic information, are normal in number and appearance?
chromosomes

Real gases deviate from ideal form at high pressure and what other thermodynamic condition?
low temperatures

Organic substances, including proteins, carbohydrates, and oils, contain what element?
carbon

What term describes anything that occupies space and has mass, and is generally divided into three states?
matter

When light strikes the rods and cones, they hyperpolarize, shutting off their release of what?
glutamate

The heart contracts rhythmically to pump what to the lungs and the rest of the body?
blood

What do light emitters do to what you see?
add frequencies

A turbine using tides in the ocean can create what type of energy?
electricity

The atomic number is the same as the number of what in an atom?
protons

What is the closed circulatory system of humans and other vertebrates called?
cardiovascular system

"red-shift" refers to a shift toward red in the spectrum from what celestial bodies?
stars

What is the name for substances with a ph above 7?
bases

The subducting oceanic plate does what as it reenters the mantle?
melts

Which stage of development is a period during which apoptosis is widespread and plays a crucial role?
embryonic

What orifice in the body is particularly helpful in both digestion and respiration?
mouth

What subphylum, which includes crabs and crayfish, represents the dominant aquatic arthropods?
crustaceans

What do neurons pass to the next neuron?
neurotransmitters

What determines which type of precipitation falls in the atmosphere?
air temperature

The main functions of what complex carbohydrates are to store energy and form structural tissues?
polysaccharides

High consumption of saturated fats is linked to an increased risk of what disease?
cardiovascular disease

What does hair get its color from?
melanin pigments

What type of animal in the sea spend most of their lives as medusae?
jellyfish

Desert plants have evolved processes to conserve water and deal with harsh conditions. a more efficient use of co2 allows plants to adapt to living with what?
less water

Plants, cyanobacteria, and algae are living things that undergo what process and produce glucose?
photosynthesis

All chemical changes involve a transfer of what?
energy

What is the unique larval form of mollusks called?
trochophore

A voltage source and a conductor are common to all what?
electric circuits

Root systems are mainly of two types. dicots have a tap root system, while monocots have a what?
fibrous root system

Enzymes in cellular reactions work to do what to the reaction?
speed it up

Bony fish can live in either of what type of aquatic biome?
saltwater or freshwater

What is categorized by the forces holding the individual atoms, ions, or molecules together?
solids

What are the two main types of air pollutants?
primary and secondary

The job of the nucleolus is to build what?
ribosomes

For many decades, scientists have known that atoms consist of electrons and other particles called protons and?
neutrons

Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia have life-threatening levels of cholesterol because their cells cannot clear what particles from their blood?
low-density lipoprotein (ldl)

What action, performed multiple times daily, is the single biggest use of water in the home?
flushing the toilet

What is a form of mechanical energy that starts with a vibration in matter?
sound energy

What's caused by damaged capillaries in the kidneys so the nephrons can no longer filter blood?
kidney failure

What do roots bring in from the soil into the plant?
water and nutrients

In addition to spiral cleavage, protostomes also undergo which other form of cleavage?
determinate

What term is used to describe animals with three germ layers?
triploblasts

Due to similar function, the wings of bats and birds are referred to as what type of structures?
analogous structures

If the amount of force of that is applied is increased, what happens to the work that a machine is producing?
it is easier

What is the name for speed with a direction?
velocity

How many types of mechanical waves are there?
three

What is required for a decay chain to end?
stable end-product

What do you call the process that results in an animal producing offspring?
reproduction

What do voltmeters measure?
voltage drop across a resistor

Distinct from a suspension, a solution is considered what type of mixture?
homogeneous

What is the largest and most complex algae
brown algae

Scientists around the world study speciation, documenting observations both of living organisms and those found in the fossil record. as their ideas take shape and as research reveals new details about how life evolves, they develop models to help explain what?
rates of speciation

How long do the long-lived isotopes require to decay to a safe level in a nuclear reactor?
thousands of years

The production of light by living things is called what?
bioluminescence

Animals that live in groups with other members of their species are called what?
social animals

Teeth in the back of the mouth are used for what?
grinding food

Compared to red light, blue light has a shorter what?
wavelength

The most common substance on earth, water, is primarily present in what state?
liquid

What kind of respiration allows rapid production of atp in low oxygen situations?
anaerobic

What two forces tend to keep an animal stationary and thus oppose locomotion?
friction and gravity

What are membrane-bound organelles with their own dna called?
plastids

What kind of atomic molecule is oxygen gas?
diatomic

Why can't fungi make their own food like plants do?
no chloroplasts

The vestibulocochlear nerve is responsible for the senses of hearing and what else?
balance

What is an alloy of copper and tin?
bronze

What spreads sti during sexual contact?
pathogens

How many amino acids are arranged like "beads on a string" to form proteins?
20

What do refrigerator magnets contain that make them stick to a refrigerator door?
iron

When does most amphibians' parenting end?
once eggs have been laid

What helps an insectivorous plant attract and digest insects?
specialized leaves

E. coli uses how many enzymes to take up and metabolize lactose?
3

What forms as a result of decomposition when n2o  is heated?
nitrogen and oxygen

Biomass can also be processed to make what kind of fuel?
biofuel

What is produced when an egg is fertilized by a sperm in a fallopian tube?
zygote

What structures receive blood from the atria and pump it out of the heart?
ventricles

What are modified leaves that bear sporangia?
sporophylls

The reverse process of moving material into a cell is the process of what?
exocytosis

Constriction and dilation allow the circulatory system to change the amount of blood flowing to which body parts?
organs

Focused on evolution, the studies of what man have reshaped and influenced all aspects of biology?
charles darwin

Are cnidarians typically found in ocean or fresh water habitats?
ocean

Increasing the pressure on a gas has what effect on its solubility?
increase

What type of fertilization do most reptiles have?
internal

The vertebrate endoskeleton is made of bone and what tough, flexible tissue?
cartilage

What has hot days and cool nights, and are typically covered with sand dunes or sparse but hardy plants?
deserts

In addition to insects, what large invertebrate phylum includes animals such as spiders, centipedes, and lobsters?
arthropoda

Monatomic cations have the same name as their parent element. what happens to monatomic anions?
ends in - de

What part of the body do hookworms infest?
intestines

Parasitic leeches feed off of what?
blood

The mars rover collected round clumps of crystals that, on earth, usually form in what?
water

Attraction of a material by a magnet is an example of what type of property?
physical

What phenomenon is essential in order for evolution to occur because it increases genetic variation and the potential for individuals to differ?
mutation

The two types of glaciers are continental and what other kind?
valley

In dioecious animals, females generally produce what contribution to reproduction?
eggs

The cells of all protists have a what?
nucleus

What type of organism causes many common diseases such as strep throat and food-borne illnesses?
bacteria

What type of current do generators in cars use?
alternating current

What is the movement of plates called?
plate tectonics

Name a carbonyl in which the carbon atom is bonded to one carbon atom and one hydrogen atom (or two hydrogen atoms).
aldehyde

The color of an object is determined by the what of it's reflected light?
wavelength

The process in which dna is copied is called what?
dna replication

What type of seismic waves do the most damage?
surface

Which continent is the only one that reptiles don't inhabit?
antartica

What is responsible for the foul smell of rancid butt?
butyric acid

The carbon cycle can be thought of in terms of two interdependent cycles - cellular respiration and what else?
photosynthesis

What is the term for the green pigment in leaves that captures energy from the sun?
chlorophyll

Evolutionary adaptation is evidenced by different shapes of what structures in birds with different food preferences?
beaks

Amino acids contain both a carboxylic acid group and what other group?
amine

What is an alloy of both tin and copper?
bronze

What is the option to remove kidney stones other than surgery?
ultrasound treatments

What does a theory need to be supported by?
many observations

What happens when antibodies are transferred to a person who has never been exposed to the pathogen?
passive immunity

What is the name for electrons closer to the nucleus that do not participate in bonding?
core electrons

Which acid releases nitrates into soil?
uric

What instrument made it possible to study pressure quantitatively?
barometer

What asymmetrical organ has four chambers and, in humans, is about the size of a clenched fist?
heart

Geiger counters can be used to detect what, in general?
radiation

What term is used to describe the energy of matter in motion?
kinetic energy

What do you call the illness that occurs when harmful bacteria enter the digestive system in food?
food poisoning

Herbivores and omnivores have longer alimentary canals compared to what?
carnivores

What do tadpoles turn into?
frogs

The heat capacity of an object depends on its chemical composition and what other property?
mass

Human skin color is primarily due to the presence of what pigment in the skin?
melanin

What is pollution that enters water at just one point called?
point source pollution

The various sensory organs are part of what organ system?
nervous

Down syndrome is caused by having three copies of what, a condition known as trisomy?
chromosome

What kind of weathering changes the size of a mineral or rock but does not change its chemical composition?
mechanical weathering

What do waves do when they are unable to pass through an object?
reflect off

What is used to date older fossils?
radioactive isotopes

What external feature in human beings is responsible for balance?
ears

What branch of science is the study of human origins?
paleoanthropology

Skeletal muscle cells and cardiac muscle cells share what property, which is not shared by smooth muscle cells?
striations

Latitude affects the amount of what received by an area, which in turn affects the temperature of a region?
solar radiation

What do you call an abnormal mass formed when cells divide uncontrollably?
tumor

What layer is below the lithosphere and in the upper mantle?
asthenosphere

What are lipopolysaccharide components of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria?
endotoxins

In aquatic communities, the main producers are photosynthetic protists and what?
prokaryotes

How does the liquid in a thermometer respond to heat or cold?
expands or contracts

In most fish, where does the embryo develop in relation to the mother's body?
outside

What is the name of the life stage when a child becomes sexually mature?
puberty

Cytokinesis divides what part of the cell into two distinctive cells?
cytoplasm

What is it called when a liquid displays more attraction between the liquid particles than attraction between the liquid and the glass?
cohesion

In what type of mining must tunnels be blasted into the rock so that miners and equipment can get to the ore?
underground mining

What kind of energy is released when the thermochemical reaction of a campfire converts wood to carbon dioxide and water?
heat

Like the mitochondria, chloroplasts have their own dna and ribosomes, but chloroplasts have an entirely different function. chloroplasts are plant cell organelles that carry out what?
photosynthesis

While normal light microscopes can magnify objects up to about 1,500 times, what advanced instruments can magnify objects up to 1,000,000 times?
electron microscopes

What kind of energy does pyruvate have a lot of?
chemical

What type of landscape has grasslands with scattered trees, are hot and have extensive dry seasons along with fire?
savannas

What may be lost when waves travel through matter, but not when they travel through space?
energy

Where does mechanical digestion begin?
mouth

How does the sun generate energy?
nuclear fusion

What stored form of energy is made up of glycerol and three fatty acid chains?
triglycerides

What do jellyfish give off to startle possible predators?
light

What is an example of a metaloid element?
silicon

Scientists use a quantity called __________ as a measure of disorder, or randomness.
entropy

Niche refers to the role a species plays in what?
the ecosystem

An irreversible increase in size is known as?
growth

Bacterial contamination of foods can lead to digestive problems, an illness known as what?
food poisoning

All combustion reactions are what type of reactions?
exothermic

What produces microspores that develop into pollen grains containing male gametophytes?
stamens

When a star's core collapses inward while the outer layers spread and cool, what "colorful" celestial body forms?
red giant

Timber, obtained from trees that can be replanted to replace those that are cut down, is an example of what type of resource?
renewable

What type of blood does the right side of the heart collect and then pump to the lungs?
oxygen-poor blood

What elements have the highest attraction for electrons?
nonmetals

What is the layman's term for mammals raising their hair with tiny muscles in the skin, something that is automatic in humans sensing cold?
goosebumps

What are ring-shaped hydrocarbons called?
cyclic hydrocarbons

What increases in processes in which solid or liquid reactants form gaseous products and when solid reactants form liquid products?
entropy

How many pairs of legs do arachnids have?
4

Besides the uppermost mantle, what else is the lithosphere composed of?
crust

What is another term for dry ice?
solid carbon dioxide

Name the process that produces many copies of a certain gene.
gene cloning

Rupture or blockage of arteries in the head is the usual cause of what condition?
stroke

What type of lines run next to each other?
contour lines

What type of light sensing organs do scaophopoda have?
radula

What kind of cleavage do mammalian eggs exhibit?
holoblastic

What is the name of the process for delivering water to crops?
irrigation

What is the process in which a liquid boils and changes to a gas?
vaporization

What are the two most common common ways that brain and spinal cord injuries occur?
car crashes and athletic activities

What is the largest planet in the solar system?
jupiter

What are elements required in very small amounts?
micronutrients

What can be calculated by multiplying an object’s mass in kilograms (kg) by its velocity in meters per second (m/s)?
momentum

What will happen to a rock when it's under tremendous stress?
it will fracture

Very large stars eventually become what extremely dense space regions, which are so dense that no light can escape from them?
black holes

Which theory suggests plant species richness increases with island size?
island equilibrium model

What state of hydrogen can be predicted based on the atoms to which it is bonded?
oxidation

What occurs when there is little to no rain in a period of time?
droughts

At any specific time, the rate at which a reaction is proceeding is known as its what?
instantaneous rate

The skin is a familiar organ made of what kind of tissue?
epithelial tissue

Evolution that occurs over a short period of time is known as what?
microevolution

What do osteoblasts secrete that mineralizes to become bone matrix?
collagen

Atoms that have gained electrons and become negatively charged are called what?
negative ions

Snakes are which type of animal?
carnivorous

Cancer occurs most often in adults over what age?
fifty

Mammals are either herbivores, carnivores or what?
omnivores

What paired human organs play a vital role in maintaining homeostasis?
kidneys

What is the process in which glucose is made using energy in light called?
photosynthesis

What zone is outside the radiative zone?
convection zone

What do you call the temperature at which a liquid boils and starts changing to a gas?
boiling point

The distinctive appearance of what tissue is due to polysaccharides called chondroitin sulfates?
cartilage

In the humid subtropical climate, summers are ____ but winters are very cold.
wet

What are found primarily in lines around the edges of some continents?
earthquakes

What is another name for trisomy 21?
down syndrome

Which part of the brain regulates the rate of breathing?
brain stem

Light with the longest wavelengths is called what?
infrared light

Which gas do people exhale during each breath?
carbon dioxide

Nonvascular plants such as liverworts, hornworts, and mosses lack what three typical plant features?
roots, stems, leaves

Much of the iron produced is refined and converted into what?
steel

What can be formed by converging light rays behind a lens, onto a piece of film?
a photograph

What is the star-like structure inside the paramecia?
the contractile vacuole

What is the study of the chemical elements necessary for plant growth called?
plant nutrition

Both alpha and beta decay change the number of what in an atom's nucleus?
protons

What types of living things are divided into nonvascular and vascular groupings?
plants

What can exposure to chemical or biological agents cause later in life?
an acquired immunodeficiency

What direction are sediments deposited?
horizontally

When the air temperature reaches the dew point, water vapor starts to do what?
condense

What do you call the metal elements listed below the periodic table?
transition metals

Each silicon atom shares how many valence electrons with other silicon atoms in a crystal?
four

What is produced by the reaction of metal oxide with water?
soluble metal hydroxides

Which type of weathering causes changes int he rocks materials, chemical or mechanical?
chemical

What type of rocks form from sediments that are cemented and compacted?
sedimentary

What is the common term for solid carbon dioxide, which is used as a coolant?
dry ice

What is the most common type of joint in the human body?
movable joints

What kind of relationship exists between living things that depend on the same resources?
competition

Latitude plays an important role in determining what in a region?
climate

A very small artery that leads to a capillary is known as what?
arteriole

What kind of systems use fluid to transmit pressure and increase force?
hydraulic systems

What organ interprets what our sensory organs sense?
brain

Gametes are products through meiosis in which organs?
gonads

Haumea, which is the third brightest kuiper belt object has an odd oval shape which is probably caused by what?
extremely rapid rotation

A changing magnetic field produces an electric current in what?
a conductor

What do plants do to prevent water loss at night?
close their leaves

What term describes a colloidal dispersion of a liquid in either a liquid or a solid?
emulsion

What evidence is there that mt. everest was once at the bottom of a sea?
fossils

Because atoms have equal numbers of positive protons and negative electrons, what kind of electric charge do they possess?
neutral

What is the term for  interactions between individuals of different species over an extended period of time which impact the abundance and distribution of the associating populations?
symbiotic relationships

Plane mirrors work because the light rays create what behind the mirror?
a virtual image

What do we call natural resources that are remade by natural processes as quickly as people use them?
renewable

What is the process of breaking down food into components the body can absorb called?
digestion

What controls what moves inside and outside the cell?
the plasma membrane

Yeasts are single-celled fungi. about 1,000 species are recognized, but the most common species is saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is used in this?
bread making

Another measure of the effectiveness of a machine is its what?
mechanical advantage

What are biofilms resistant to many common forms of?
sterilization

Fractures and faults are terms you hear when talking about?
earthquakes

What are resources that can not be remade, or would take too long to remake to keep up wiht human use called?
nonrewable resources

Alkenes with the same atoms but different shapes are called what?
isomers

Which of the animals digest cellulose with the aid of methanogens?
cows

What is the major source of warmth for earth?
the sun

Like a runner passing a baton, the transmission of nerve impulses between neurons depends on what?
neurotransmitters

Which organ is the control center of the nervous system?
the brain

Continental climates are generally found in what areas of landmasses?
inland

What mainly gives the body energy?
food

A mineral can be made of an element or a?
compound

Herbivores are heterotrophs that eat only or mainly what?
plants

The heart is an organ in which system?
circulatory system

What are the subatomic particles of the nucleus called?
nucleons

Who wrote the book, on the origin of species?
darwin

Tar sands are rocky materials mixed with what?
very thick oil

A current in a circuit needs a complete what?
path

How do glucose, ions, and other larger molecules leave the blood?
through intercellular clefts

The basal forebrain contains what that are important in learning and memory?
nuclei

What thin layer of air acts as a barrier to prevent cool air from mixing with warm air in the stratosphere?
tropopause

What is the name for the male gamete?
sperm

The strength of acids is measured on what scale?
ph

What term is also known as the contact activation pathway?
intrinsic pathway

What comprises the contents of a cell between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope?
cytoplasm

What is used to convert concentrations to collisions per second?
frequency factor

The ovules, which are the female gametophytes, are held in what organ?
ovary

Snippet 2: one of the reasons the periodic table is so useful is because its structure allows us to qualitatively determine how some properties of the elements vary versus their position on the periodic table. the variation of properties versus position on the periodic table is called what?
periodic trends

Equilibriums are affected by changes in concentration, total pressure or volume, and this?
temperature

What type of seed-bearing structure of a flowering plant usually develop into?
fruit

What are ionic substances completely held together by?
ionic bonds

What word do get from the arabic al-qili, meaning “ashes of the saltwort plant from salt marshes”?
alkali

Metals are elements that can conduct what?
electricity

The earth is like organisms in that it maintains a stable state, which is also known as what?
homeostasis

The purpose of any cooling system is to transfer what type of energy in order to keep things cool?
thermal

What is the heart's main task?
pump blood

Which antibacterial protein is found in tears and saliva?
human lysozyme

What elements tend to conduct well?
metals

What type of masses are structureless particles that cannot spin?
point masses

What do scientists use to search other planets suitable for living?
telescopes

All species of crocodilians have similar body structures, including an elongated snout, powerful jaws, muscular tail, large protective scales, streamlined body, and eyes and nostrils that are positioned on what?
top of head

During adulthood, what is needed for the production of sperm?
testosterone

What are solid lipids that animals use to store energy called?
fats

What in science are very important so that we can compare experimental data from one lab to another and make sure we all are talking about the same thing?
standard measurements

What substances in a car battery can be melted and recycled?
lead and plastic

Unlike a crystalline solid, an amorphous solid is a solid that lacks a what?
ordered internal structure

Many carbohydrates can enter glycolysis, most often after conversion to what?
glucose

If a quantity of a reactant remains unconsumed after complete reaction has occurred, it is?
in excess

Name the one metal that melts below room temperature?
mercury

The way a mineral cleaves or fractures depends on what part of the mineral?
the crystal structure

Ultimately, most life forms get their energy from this?
sun

What was diorite commonly used for in ancient civilizations?
art

Aquatic biomes in the ocean are called what?
marine biomes

When an ionic compound dissociates in water, water molecules surround each ion and separate it from the rest of the what?
solid

What device is used to measure temperature?
thermometer

What has the smallest, lightest atoms of all the elements and is colorless, odorless, tasteless and nontoxic, but highly flammable in its pure state?
hydrogen

If two populations do not mate and produce fertile offspring, what results?
separate species

What system includes the brain and the spinal cord?
central nervous

Light is produced when charged particles do what, frequently in the form of oscillating?
accelerate

Respiration rate correlates with what?
energy use

What is the only commercial way of reproducing plants such as orchids?
cloning

Birds adapted wings and weathers for flight during what process?
evolution

Which factor ruins renewable resources like soil and water?
careless human action

How does the solubility of gases in liquids change with increasing temperature?
it decreases

What are all living things made of?
cells

Where does the nucleus store chromatin ?
nucleoplasm

What do the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas contribute that aid in digestion?
chemicals

What are all tissues external to the vascular cambium called?
bark

Spirals, spheres, and rods are examples of what distinguishing property of bacteria?
shape

The goal of homeostasis is the maintenance of what, around a point or value called a set point?
equilibrium

What type of energy of a system is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of its atoms and molecules?
internal energy u

Primary batteries are single-use batteries because they cannot be what?
recharged

Layers of fat are formed by what type of tissue?
adipose tissue

Basidiomycetes do what to wood and other plant material?
decompose

Pathogens infect many animals and are agents of what?
disease

Sediments in oligotrophic lakes contain large amounts of what?
decomposable organic matter

What tides occur during the new moon and full moon?
spring

In passive transport, small molecules or ions move across the cell membrane without requiring input of what?
energy

Some bacteria also have tail-like structures called what?
flagella

People with which skin type run a greater risk of vitamin d deficiency?
darker skin

What happens to temperature in the troposphere as the altitude increases?
it decreases

The kidneys help control acid-base balance by excreting _____ and generating bicarbonate that helps maintain blood plasma ph within a normal range?
hydrogen ions

What does the geiger counter detect?
radiation

Mollusks such as squid and octopi, which must hunt to survive, possess what complex organs containing millions of neurons?
brains

Which direction from the source do pollutants in an aquifer spread?
outward

What type of activity in the brain causes epilepsy?
abnormal electrical activity

What does a healthy immune system fight off?
infections and other dieases

Groundwater dissolves minerals and rocks into what?
ions

What is the term for a certain form of matter that has the same physical properties throughout?
phase

Bacteria are responsible for many types of what in humans?
diseases

Humans and other animals can suffer from diets lacking in what essential "ingredients"?
nutrients

The size and symmetry of a beetle’s or an elk’s antlers or a grasshopper’s song communicate rather clearly their state of what?
health

How is blood supplied from the mother to the fetus?
umbilical cord

How long does membrane depoloriazation typically last for?
one minute

What are the three types of mixtures?
solutions, suspensions, colloids

Double strands of what wrap around histone proteins to form nucleosomes, which are coiled into a chromatin fiber?
dna

What is the process when animals maintain an internal temperature?
thermoregulation

Both androgen secretion and spermatogenesis occur continuously starting with what?
puberty

Where does the process of digestion start?
mouth

As distance from the source increases, the area covered by the sound waves increases, lessening what?
intensity

Mountain ranges, plateaus, and plains are features of what large landforms?
continents

How many pathogens can each droplet contain?
thousands

The ability to change color, separately mobile and stereoscopic eyes, and rapidly extrudable tongues are distinguishing features of what lizards?
chameleons

What is the other name of newton’s first law?
law of inertia

The velocity at the beginning of the time interval is called what?
initial velocity

In which sphere of the atmosphere do the northern and southern lights occur?
thermosphere

What carbohydrate from fruit juices is a gel-forming substance important in jelly making?
pectin

Warm water from the equator mixes with cold water from where?
the poles

A single amino acid substitution in hemoglobin leads to what disease?
sickle cell anemia

Why does the heating element of a toaster get hot so quickly?
good conductor

What is the industrial chemical produced in greatest quantity worldwide?
sulfuric acid

What term is used to describe a protein that acts as a biological catalyst?
enzyme

What is the transfer of energy by waves called?
radiation

What are the the individual protein subunits making up the capsid called?
capsomeres

The eukaryotic cell cycle is regulated by a what?
molecular control system

How many identical daughter cells are created at the end of cytokinesis?
two

Which disease does the bacteria salmonella cause in humans?
food poisoning

What term describes the application of knowledge to real-world problems and is practiced by engineers?
technology

What surrounds the lungs in a thoracic cavity?
double membrane

When lactose is absent, a repressor protein binds to what?
operator

The four moons of jupiter are collectively named after what 17th century astronomer, who discovered them?
galileo

What is the term for the distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves?
wavelength

Which instruments are used to measure the angle of the slope of a volcano?
tiltmeters

What is the term for matter that does not let any light pass through?
opaque

Gain or loss of what causes an atom to become a negatively or positively charged ion?
electrons

The electrochemical potential across a membrane determines the tendency of an ion to do what?
cross the membrane

Nucleic acids are polymers made of monomers called what?
nucleotides

Antibodies also mark pathogens for destruction by which cells?
phagocytic

What are small organelles and are the site of protein synthesis called.
ribosomes

What term is defined as the ability to locate objects in the dark by bouncing sound waves off them.
echolocation

Ringworm and athlete’s foot are common human diseases caused by types of what?
fungi

Vertical layering is an important feature of the terrestrial type of what kind of community?
biome

What do many cells depend on glucose for?
energy

When continental crust is pulled apart, it breaks into blocks that are separated by what?
faults

What body part boasts three articulations and includes the patella?
knee

The physical properties of gases are predictable using mathematical formulas known as what?
gas laws

What is the disease where some alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid?
pneumonia

The primary function of leaves is to collect sunlight and make food by what process?
photosynthesis

In which type of reaction are compounds formed?
chemical reaction

For feeding, the head contains one pair of mandibles and two pairs of what?
maxillae

What term given to animals like reptiles is a synonym for ectothermic, which means that their heat comes from their environment?
cold-blooded

What forms in the ocean from the seafloor spreading?
new oceanic crust

What does ozone in the stratosphere protect us from?
solar rays

What is the basic unit of matter?
atom

What is the name of the protein that is found in hairs and nails?
keratin

When fuel is burned most of the energy is released as what?
heat

A change in one or more physical properties of matter without any change in chemical properties is called what?
physical change

Particles with what type of electric charges attract each other?
opposite

Avoiding carcinogens helps lower the risk of what?
cancer

What is the mechanism that accounts for the drifting of continents?
seafloor spreading

In a dehydration reaction, what is removed as two monomers are joined together?
water

What is the smallest unit of structure and function of all living organisms?
the cell

The dual character is critical for the formation of the what?
lipid bilayer

In humans, a zygote has how many chromosomes?
46

The elements are arranged in rows, each representing the filling of what shell?
electron

The water cycle is powered by energy from where?
sun

When lactose is present in the cell, what allows the lac genes to be expressed?
nonbinding of repressor protein

What class of animals, translated as “head foot”, includes octopuses, squids, cuttlefish, and nautilus?
cephalopods

What can be calculated by solving the average speed formula?
distance or time

Transverse divisions are associated with leaf elongation, and longitudinal divisions are associated with what?
leaf broadening

Of the four nerve plexuses, two are found at the cervical level, one at the lumbar level, and one at which level ?
sacral

When does sublimation occur?
when the ice and snow change directly into water vapors

What organism is responsible for most decomposition in forest?
fungi

Cancer of the testes is most common in males between what ages?
15 and 35

Prions are slow-acting, virtually indestructible infectious proteins that cause diseases of what vital organ in mammals?
brain

What does the male reproductive system consist of?
structures that produce sperm and secrete testosterone

What causes genetic disorders in humans?
alterations of chromosome

What can lead to a loss of genetic variation within populations?
genetic drift

Four electron groups orient themselves into what shape that has four faces?
tetrahedron

The primary hormones derived from lipids are what?
steroids

What are most metal objects made of?
metal alloys

What law explains how the change in direction of the light ray depends on how the speed of light changes, which in turn is related to the indices of refraction of the media involved?
law of refraction

What limits the growth or development of an organism, population, or process?
limiting factor

The primary application of biotechnology is in what field?
medicine

In naming ternary compounds, which type of particle is stated first?
cation

The pollen grain absorbs water and does what after it adheres to the stigma of a carpel?
germinates

What term refers to change in position over time?
velocity

Ice ages, continental drift, and giant meteorites striking earth have caused what phenomenon?
extinction

What can all living things sense and respond to in their environment?
stimuli

What do we call use of electric current to encode information?
electronics

How many additional pairs of appendages do arachnids have?
2

Melting points are temperatures that are high enough to separate liquids from which substances?
solids

Strong, stable bonds between carbon atoms produce complex molecules containing chains, branches, and rings; the chemistry of these compounds is called what?
organic chemistry

What are the blood vessels that carry blood toward the heart and tend to have thinner walls?
veins

What is a measure of the amount of space a substance or an object takes up?
volume

Potassium, calcium, and magnesium are considered what kind of nutrients?
macronutrients

What normally prevent a positively charged particle from colliding and reacting with a positively charged nucleus, but may be overcome by kinetic energy?.
electrostatic repulsions

Sometimes two or more distinct phenotypes can each have their advantages and be selected for by natural selection; this is known as what?
diversifying selection

Management programs based on population-regulating factors have helped prevent the extinction of many?
endangered species

What basic plant structure is the site of photosynthesis?
leaves

What provides the identities of the reactants and products involved in the chemical change?
chemical formulas

What process creates sperm?
spermatogensis

Both fluorine and lithium are highly reactive elements because of their number of what?
valence electrons

Earth acts like a giant version of what device, with angular momentum along its axis and pointing at polaris, the north star?
gyroscope

Ovulation takes place in what organ and is part of the menstrual cycle?
ovary

Instead of a nervous system, plant responses are generally controlled by what type of molecules, which serves as chemical messengers?
hormones

Asexual reproduction occurs by what process?
budding

What do all respiratory diseases affect?
gas exchange process

What is one trait that the sponge and tarantula share?
lack of a backbone

What bonds form when pairs of electrons are shared?
covalent bonds

Hydrocarbons in which all carbons are connected by single bonds are called?
alkanes

What occurs when two wave crests overlap?
constructive interference

The length of a rectangular surface multiplied by its width is equal to what?
area

What is the testing for disease in a fetus or embryo?
prenatal screening

The two adrenal glands are glands located just above the what?
kidneys

What is the term for the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time?
wave frequency

The migration of what familiar coastal landform involves saltation and gravity?
sand dunes

The procedure known as angioplasty is used when what part of the circulatory system is clogged?
blood vessel

What type of maps detail detail the types and locations of rocks found in an area?
geologic maps

What is another term for the voice box?
larynx

The proximity of the axillary buds to the apical bud is partly responsible for their what?
dormancy

How do the vast majority of fish reproduce?
sexually

What is the quantity of force multiplied by the time it is applied called?
impulse

Diphenylamine acts as a stabilizer for certain types of what?
explosives

Behind the pupil, a single lens focuses light on a layer of what?
photoreceptors

Why is the root cap continuously replaced in plants?
damage through pushing

Aquatic biomes are determined mainly by distance from shore and what other factor?
depth of water

Who is said to have dropped two objects of different masses from the tower of pisa?
galileo

What determines the length and thickness of dna chromosomes?
degree of dna coiling

What type of gas is used to fill glass tubes of lighted signs?
noble

What does fog consist of?
droplets of water

Spiders use the hydrostatic pressure generated by an open type of what anatomical system to extend their legs?
circulatory

The normal respiratory rate per minute in adult humans is?
12-18 breaths

Where is glycogen created and stored in the body?
liver and muscles

When we neutralize a weak base with a strong acid, the product is ________ containing the conjugate acid of the weak base.
salt

What is the main component of milk?
water

Stomata are the main avenues of transpiration, the evaporative loss of water from what?
leaves

What is a form of matter that has a definite shape and volume?
solid

What type of energy is stored in the nuclei of atoms?
nuclear energy

Providing evidence of their ancestry, some species of what legless animals retain vestigial pelvic and limb bones?
snakes

What happens when more glucose is present than the proteins can handle, in the body?
excreted as urine

What are most protist diseases in humans caused by?
protozoa

Transporting blood is the main job of the heart and what?
blood vessels

What occurs when the amount of solute dissolved exceeds the solubility of the solute?
saturation

What are cyclins made up of?
group of proteins

What do ferns use in place of seeds to reproduce?
spores

Water affects the availability of what important element in aquatic environments and in flooded soils?
oxygen

Fuels according to the law of what, can never actually be “consumed”; it can only be changed from one form to another?
conservation of energy

The ability of matter to burn is called?
flammability

Uncontrolled cell growth can lead to tumors and what disease?
cancer

Video and audio signals are broadcast on these?
electromagnetic waves

In a tropical rainforest, where are ferns common?
understory

Which metalloids are found in the nitrogen group?
arsenic and antimony

What kind of family is haumea part of?
a collisional family

The db gene encodes the which receptor?
leptin

How many main types of diabetes are there?
two

What organ is similar to a lymph node but is much larger and filters blood instead of lymph?
spleen

What is the process of converting atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia called?
nitrogen fixation

Phospholipids and some proteins move laterally within what?
membrane

What changes encoded waves which are being broadcast into sounds?
radio receivers

When the oval window vibrates, it causes what else to vibrate as well?
the cochlea

When changes in the genes of a species result in a new species, the process is called what?
biological evolution

What happens if a person doesn’t take in enough water to replace the water lost in sweat?
dehydration

How does the atomic number change during beta emission?
increases by one

What is the most widely distributed organism around?
phages

On a topographic map, what is the term for a line of equal elevation?
contour line

Where does the stratosphere get most of its heat?
sun

What source of ocean pollution kills animals by coating them?
oil spill

What is the name of pluto's moon?
charon

What type of bond generally forms between a metal and non-metal?
ionic

What's the name for an atom that has gained or lost an electron?
an ion

Light is scattered from what in our atmosphere?
molecules

What refers to the union of a male and female of the same species for reproduction?
mating

Tree sap enclosing an organism in amber or an organism preserved in tar or ice are actually examples of what?
fossils

Which theory states that the characteristics of living things are controlled by genes?
gene theory

What does the secondary oocyte have the most of from the original cell?
cytoplasm

Kangaroos, koala and opossums are part of what group?
marsupials

What term refers to a group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area and is the unit of natural selection, adaptation, and microevolution?
population

What larger theory is einstein's equation part of?
theory of relativity

Low yields of nitric oxide, no, form when heating nitrogen and oxygen together. no also forms when lightning passes through air during this?
thunderstorms

Scientists that study dolphins and other life in the ocean are called what?
marine biologists

What is the scientific term for the act of eating or feeding?
ingestion

The collision of what is responsible for massive earthquakes?
two continents

Proteins are one of four classes of what type of compounds?
biochemical

What is the term for a fold that arches upward?
anticline

Under certain conditions, electric current causes what type of field?
magnetic

What is the most complex organ in the human body?
brain

What is a soft connective tissue inside pores and cavities in spongy bone?
bone marrow

What is another term for chemical messenger molecules?
hormones

The alimentary canal is associated with what organ system?
digestive

Which organisms capture light energy and convert it to chemical energy inside their cell?
phototrophs

Specific scents are often associated with what?
memories

Microwave ovens use radiation to provide food with what kind of energy?
heat

What are usually planted in rows with bare soil in between the rows?
crops

Name the type of system that a jellyfish does not have?
circulatory

Because plants are relatively immobile, they can function with bulky energy storage in the form of what?
starch

How do invertebrates reproduce?
sexually

The process of transferring pollen from the male reproductive part of a flower known as the anthers to the female reproductive part of the flower known as the stigma is referred to as what?
pollination

What do you call catalysts that are found inside of living things?
enzymes

Energy from sunlight is absorbed by what pigment in the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts?
chlorophyll

Surface tension forces between moleculse cause the surface of liquid to contract to what?
smallest surface area

What term refers to the breaking stress that will cause permanent deformation or fracture of a material?
tensile strength

In great apes, what process lasts 8-9 months and usually results in the birth of a single offspring?
gestation

Plants can reproduce sexually and in which other way?
asexually

Earth is the only planet in the solar system that has what element, which is essential for human life, present in all three of its states?
water

Although individuals of a given species are genetically similar, they are not identical; every individual has a unique set of these?
traits

The following definition relates to which term: the application of knowledge to real-world problems?
technology

Pauropods, presumed relatives of millipedes usually found in soil, leaf litter and other moist places, live on all continents except what?
antarctica

The frequency of a wave is the reciprocal of what other attribute of the wave?
period

People with type o blood are often called what?
universal donors

Chemical changes occur because of what?
chemical reactions

Low-level exposure of humans to radiation can cause what?
cancer

What are the nonliving parts of ecosystems like soil and air called?
abiotic factors

A mixture of a metal with one or more other elements is called?
an alloy

What is a small protein that helps fight infections?
cytokine

What type of scientists study the effects people have on their environment?
environmental scientists

What do you call the diffusion of solutes through transport proteins in the plasma membrane?
facilitated diffusion

Like bacteria, archaea can have what to assist with movement?
flagella

What kind of mutations are produced by nucleotide-pair insertions or deletions?
frameshift

A form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in a hollow sphere is known as?
fullerene

The two complementary strands of what are separated, much like unzipping a zipper, in the initiation phase?
dna

Things that are hydrophobic repel or otherwise don't really mix with what?
water

Arteries and veins are two of the three types of blood vessels, what is the third?
capillaries

What basic structure holds plants upright, bears leaves and other structures, and transports fluids between roots and leaves?
stem

What kind of parasites are nearly all ticks that live on the body surfaces of reptiles or mammals?
bloodsucking

What results when birth rates fall even lower than death rates?
negative growth rate

How do hydrogen bonds help ions and other polar molecules?
dissolve in water

What two things determine how much kinetic energy an object has?
its mass and velocity

What are the pores in plants that keep certain gases and liquids in and out called?
stomata

What is the disease in which bronchioles in the lungs periodically swell and fill with mucus?
asthma

E. histolytica causes what kind of dysentery?
amebic

What is a copy of an image formed by reflection or refraction?
an image

What term refers to the union of a male and female of the same species for reproduction?
mating

What bodily function do the triceps help perform?
extend the arm

What properties describe the existence of matter, as opposed to chemical properties that describe how substances change into other substances?
physical

Which phylum are all vertebrate organisms a member of?
phylum chordata

What property of matter is defined as the ability to do work and is required by all living organisms in order to grow and reproduce?
energy

What do nearly all nonsense mutations lead to ?
nonfunctional proteins

What cannot be created or destroyed in a chemical reaction?
matter

When the energy of the earthquake reaches shore, it forms a huge wave called?
a tsunami

Which muscle is broad, triangular and located on the inferior part of the back where it inserts into the aponeurosis?
latissimus dorsi

What do organisms need to speed up biochemical reactions?
enzymes

The properties of cyclic hydrocarbons are generally quite similar to those of the corresponding open-chain compounds. so cycloalkanes (with the exception of cyclopropane, which has a highly strained ring) act very much like noncyclic alkanes. cyclic structures containing five or six carbon atoms, such as cyclopentane and cyclohexane, are particularly what?
stable

What collect data on the land and sea in regards to the weather?
weather stations

What is a form of matter that has a definite volume, but an indefinite shape?
a liquid

What is stored and concentrated in the gallbladder?
bile

What is the first step towards wound repair?
clotting factors

Noble gases are monatomic because they only contain one of what?
atoms

Genetic variation helps ensure that some organisms will survive if what happens?
their environment changes

Earth’s magnetic north and south poles are not the same as what?
geographic poles

Push or pull acting on an object is also called?
force

What colors in a neon sign represent real neon?
red, orange

What kind of waves consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields?
electromagnetic waves

When do weather balloons return to earth?
when it bursts

What is the addition of oxygen to a molecule or the removal of hydrogen from a molecule called?
oxidation

Hair and nails are made of what?
keratin

What radiation, generally produced by thermal motion and the vibration and rotation of atoms and molecules, literally means "below red"?
infrared

Lactose intolerance is a condition characterized by indigestion caused by this?
dairy products

What is the name of the liquid component of a solution?
solvent

What type of tissue consists of cells that cover inner and outer body surfaces?
epithelial?

Where is the site of photosynthesis?
the chloroplast

What can be identified as an element, a compound, or a mixture?
matter

Vaccination is the process of exposing a person to pathogens on purpose so the person will develop what?
immunity

What is the layer above the troposphere?
stratosphere

The calvin cycle and light reactions are the two stages of what process?
photosynthesis

Untreated chlamydia can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease, which affects what organ system?
female reproductive system

What feature of the land do contour lines show?
three-dimensional shape

By what process does the haploid gametophyte produce the gametes?
mitosis

Where do carrier proteins carry ions or molecules?
across the membrane

Among vertebrates, what broad category of animals is most capable of learning?
mammals

What is the first step of the calvin cycle called?
carbon fixation

What harmful substance must not be drained into s storm sewer?
motor oil

What is the special name given to the diffusion of water through the cell membrane?
osmosis

What happens to the electrical conductivity of metals when placed in a pot of boiling water?
decreases slowly

Most bird species display this behavior, meaning the male and female remain together for breeding for a few years or until one mate dies?
monogamy

Many pathogens spread by droplets in the air. droplets are released when a person does what?
coughs or sneezes

Chemical reactions that consume energy are called what?
endothermic reactions

What do most organisms eat in the profundal zone of a lake?
dead organisms

The variation in a sample can be represented by what quantity, which means the total spread of values?
range

A protein’s shape is determined, most fundamentally, by the sequence of what type of acids?
amino

What are the 3 types of tissues that modern plants have?
dermal, ground, and vascular

Tropomyosin is a type of what, that winds around the chains of the actin filament and covers the myosin-binding sites to prevent actin from binding to myosin?
protein

Which group of the periodic table consists of hydrogen and the alkali metals?
group 1

What helps frogs swim during the tadpole phase?
a tail

What kind of radiation can be used to disrupt the dna-rna protein synthesis cycle that allows bacteria to reproduce?
ionizing

The adult cells that form the butterfly begin growing in what developmental stage?
embryo

What is the simplest type of carbon-based compounds?
hydrocarbons

What kinds of cells that are important to our physical functioning can atrophy when they are not used?
muscles

Dengue fever and yellow fever are examples of diseases caused by what type of pathogen?
virus

The geologic time scale is divided into eons, eras, periods, and?
epochs

What molecule is used for most energy functions in organisms?
atp or adenozine triphosphate

Which part of the nephron collects wastes in the blood?
tubule

What kind of behavior occurs only after experience or practice?
learned behavior

The right side of the heart collects what type of blood from the body?
oxygen-poor

Hot material from near the sun’s center rises in which zone?
convection zone

The presence of what in leaf cells makes most leaves appear green?
chlorophyll

What is the name of the project concerning genetics that is one of the landmark scientific events of the last 50 years?
human genome project

Wind is one method for dispersal of what, ensuring a new generation?
seeds

Most ecosystems are disturbed too often to attain what final, stable status?
climax community

What kind of diet is typical for raptors, such as hawks and owls?
carnivorous

The most basic division of land plants is between what type of plants?
nonvascular and vascular

What do vaccines produce to combat viral diseases?
immunity

Internal functions are coordinated and regulated so that the internal environment of a living thing is relatively constant, referred to as what?
homeostasis

What is a long, tube-shaped bundle of neurons, protected by the vertebrae?
the spinal cord

What does the kelvin scale measure?
temperature

Ash that enters the air naturally as a result of a volcano eruption is classified as what kind of pollutant?
primary pollutant

What happens when an increase in temperature of a gas in a rigid container happens?
pressure increases

Which reaction between alkyl halides and ammonia makes alkylamines?
nucleophilic substitution reactions

Genes are organized to make the control of gene expression easier. the promoter region is immediately upstream of this?
coding sequence

Which phylum is made up of segmented worms such as earthworms?
annelida

What is the transfer of thermal energy between substances called?
heat

What functional units of chromosomes determine specific characteristics by coding for specific proteins?
genes

Aside from light, incandescent light bulbs also give off what that wastes energy?
heat

What is an alpha particle with two protons and two neutrons called?
helium nucleus

Just as the reaction of a diol and a diacid forms a polyester, the reaction of a diacid and a diamine yields this?
polyamide

Structural rearrangements of what include partial duplications, deletions, inversions, and translocations; duplications and deletions often produce offspring that survive but exhibit physical and mental abnormalities?
chromosomes

The e. coli chromosome, like many other bacterial chromosomes, is what shape?
circular

What is the force of attraction between two masses?
gravity

Chordates include vertebrates and invertebrates that have what?
a notochord

Nearly how many millions of people die yearly due to air pollution?
five million

What instrument is used to record the length and strength of an earthquake?
seismograph

Skeletal muscles must work in pairs to move bones back and forth at a joint because they can only do what?
contract

What type of molecules are secreted by the cell in local signaling?
messenger molecules

Pulmonary ventilation in mammals occurs via what?
inhalation

Chemical signals are received by the target cell on what?
receptor proteins

What kind of organisms are prokaryotes?
single-celled

What act like filters and remove pathogens from lymph?
lymph nodes

What are the primary cells of adaptive immune response?
lymphocytes

What term refers to the friction of fluid, within itself and its surroundings?
viscosity

What do you call a unique substance formed when two or more elements combine chemically?
compound

Caves form over time when what causes rocks like limestone to dissolve?
water

Cycloalkanes are hydrocarbons whose molecules are closed rings rather than straight or branched chains. a cyclic hydrocarbon is a hydrocarbon with a ring of these?
carbon atoms

Speciation, convergent evolution, and coevolution are types of what process?
macroevolution

In what state do ionic compounds best conduct electricity?
liquid

What type of protein fibers in the cytoskeleton are the narrowest?
microfilaments

Which layer of the earth is molten?
the outer core

What is the general name for a solid material that is formed via a natural process?
mineral

In a photosystem, pigments in the light-harvesting complex pass light energy to two special molecules of what in the reaction center?
chlorophyll

What branch of science is the study of matter and energy?
physical science

What make us sick when they become human parasites?
protozoa

The tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion is called?
inertia

Contributing to the blood-brain barrier is one of the jobs of glial cells, which support neurons in what system?
central nervous system

During the condensation reaction of sugars what is removed, linking the two sugars?
water

What develops into embryos inside seeds, from which the next sporophyte generation grows?
zygotes

A change in temperature with distance is called a what?
temperature gradient

What sac, which was sitting on top of the flat embryo, envelops the embryo as it folds?
amniotic sac

Catecholamines are a class of amine hormones synthesised form which amino acid?
tyrosine

Regulation of hormone production hormone levels are primarily controlled through negative feedback, in which rising levels of a hormone inhibit its?
further release

Androgen secretion and sperm production are both controlled by hypothalamic and which other hormones?
pituitary

The sum of the superscripts in an electron configuration is equal to the number of electrons in that atom, which is in turn equal to what number?
atomic number

What part of the brain controls body position, coordination, and balance?
cerebellum

When light transfers its energy to objects, this is known as what?
absorption

What do most amphibians breathe with as larvae?
gills

The chemical used by the ants to weed their garden turns out to be what kind?
formic acid

A common age-related bone disease in which bone density and strength is decreased is know as what?
osteoporosis

Some fruit, like peaches, only have one big seed. what is this seed called?
the pit

Dragonflies were one of the first insects to do what?
fly

Intestinal cells combine with proteins to create what?
chylomicrons

Dutch elm trees used to be common, beautiful trees in the united states. now most of them have been killed by what?
dutch elm disease

Two major types of fungus-like protists are slime molds and which other?
water molds

What are broken down during digestion to provide the amino acids needed for protein synthesis?
dietary proteins

A group of atoms that results when one hydrogen atom is removed from an alkane is referred to as what?
alkyl group

What is the term for stored energy that an object has due to its position or shape?
potential energy

What force is greater on rougher surfaces than smooth surfaces?
friction

Nitrogen is a very important element to living things, because it is part of nucleotides and amino acids that are the building blocks of nucleic acids and these?
proteins

In the mouth, enzymes present in what begin to chemically break down food?
saliva

Unlike the cells of plants and fungi, animal cells lack what?
cell wall

Because alkali metals are so reactive, they are found in nature only in ________ with other elements?
combination

What is the plane that divides the body or an organ vertically into right and left sides?
sagittal plane

What are the organs work together to allow us to see?
brain and eyes

The brain develops from this early tube structure and gives rise to specific regions of the adult brain. as the neural tube grows and differentiates, it enlarges into three vesicles that correspond to the forebrain, midbrain, and this?
hindbrain

Biotechnology uses what to solve problems?
biology

What are hurricanes called in the pacific?
typhoons

What is the organ in which gas exchanges take place between blood and air?
lungs

What branch of science deals with the effects people have on the environment?
environmental science

Sickle cell anemia is what type of disorder?
autosomal recessive disorder

Which region is just posterior to the mouth?
the pharynx

What is the collective travel of sheep known as?
herd

What are these examples of: a person riding a carousel and a skydiver in free fall?
acceleration

Elements below the second period, such as silicon, do not form what as readily as second-period elements, and when they do form, they are weaker than those formed by second-period elements?
n bonds

Through what method or methods of fertilization do amphibians sexually reproduce?
external or internal

The distance between corresponding points of adjacent waves is known as the __________
wavelength

Which system consists of all the nervous tissue that lies outside the central nervous system?
peripheral nervous system

What mechanism is used by living organisms to pass along genes?
dna

The third line of defense of the immune system is called?
the immune response

What's it called when gases turn back into liquids?
condensation

What is a molecule made up of two subunits?
dimer

The pulmonary artery carries deoxygenated blood into the lungs from this?
heart

All of the living things in an area and the nonliving environment together make up what?
ecosystem

What areas of the planet are most birds native to?
tropical

What is the basis of enzyme classification?
reactions they catalyze

Scientists use the principles of what to make predictions, which they then test?
their hypothesis

How many membranes form the mitochondrion structure of a cell?
two

Lava that enters the water is called what?
pillow lava

What do we call plants that shed their leaves seasonally each year?
deciduous plants

What do some animals use to get a feel for their environment?
mechanoreceptors

Gas particles are constantly colliding with each other and the walls of a container, and these collisions are elastic, so there is no net loss of what?
energy

How do birds learn to avoid eating monarch butterflies?
conditioning

What part of the sperm contains the genetic material?
the "head"

Multiple sclerosis, huntington’s disease, and parkinson’s disease all affect what body system?
nervous system

The force that blood exerts upon the walls of the blood vessels or upon the chambers of the heart is known as blood what?
pressure

What is the term for the amount of internal energy that the substance can store?
heat capacity

An aquifer is an underground layer of rock that is saturated with what?
groundwater

Oysters require a certain minimum population density because they must be in close proximity to do this?
reproduce

Rubber is an example of what type of substances that do not allow electrons to move through them?
insulators

What gland is located in the neck, where it wraps around the trachea?
thyroid gland

What is influences the inhibition of axillary buds by an apical bud?
apical dominance

The colorless, odorless gas released when we breath is carbon dioxide. the harmful colorless, odorless gas released when matter is burned is what?
carbon monoxide

How are bacteria cells similar to our cells?
dna & plasma membrane

What kind of health problem can occur in the kidney and potentially cause problems with urination?
kidney stones

What can alkenes and alkynes be reduced with to form alkanes?
hydrogen gas

The vapor pressures of various liquids depends primarily on the strength of what kind of attractions between individual particles?
intermolecular

What is the term for a structure within the cytoplasm that performs a specific job in the cell?
organelle

The two members of a given pair of chromosomes are called what?
homologous chromosomes

What type of organism is used to produce alcoholic beverages and bread?
yeast

On top of the otolithic membrane is a layer of calcium carbonate crystals, called what?
otoliths

What do we call the locations where electrons are likely to be located around the nucleus?
orbitals

What makes up the central nervous system?
brain and spinal cord

Obligate anaerobes live and grow in the absence of what?
molecular oxygen

What is the common term for single-celled fungi?
yeasts

What process allows particles too large to move along the stream bed?
saltation

Conducting wires have a small degree of what?
electrical resistance

What allowed life to expand and diversify during the early cambrian period?
warm, humid climate

What do you call the fast-moving air currents high in the troposphere?
jet streams

What describes a close and long-term interaction between different species?
symbiosis

Rudolf virchow developed the hypothesis that cells only come from other cells in what year?
1858

Because they have free electrons, metals are able to conduct what?
electricity

What are oil in folded layers of rock called?
anticlines

Lymph vessels are like blood vessels, except they move what instead of blood?
lymph

During the first several weeks of development, the cells of the endometrium nourish what?
embryo

Which type of joints do not allow any movement of the bones?
fixed

What type of waves carry energy through matter or space as vibrating electric and magnetic fields?
electromagnetic waves

What happens when water is removed from the endospore?
its metabolism halts

What is the term for the intentional release or spread of agents of disease?
bioterrorism

Two important types of waves include longitudinal waves and what other kind?
transverse

The motion of stars in galaxies imply that there is about 10 times as much what as in the luminous objects we can see?
mass

Polymers, ceramics, adhesives, coatings, and liquid crystals are examples of materials recently discovered or developed by what type of scientists?
chemists

What does the urethra do?
carries urine and sperm out of the body

What is the term used to measure the intensity of sound waves?
decibel

What can be thought of as the most biologically productive regions on earth?
estuaries

What is the scientific term for farsightedness?
hyperopia

During fetal development of the heart, what does the bulbus cordis develop into?
right ventricle

A more crucial use of rc circuits for timing purposes is in the artificial pacemaker, used to control what?
heart rate

What causes earthquakes at mid-ocean ridges to be small and shallow?
plates are thin , young , and hot

Most geological activity takes place where?
at plate boundaries

What do we call the amount of time it will take for half of the radioactive material to decay?
one half-life

What are organisms that depend on other living things for food?
consumers

Which part of the nerve cell helps transmit nerve impulses?
long, threadlike extensions

Mount kilimanjaro has ________ climates at the top and bottom?
different

What physical process occurs when large chunks of food are broken down into smaller pieces?
mechanical digestion

What is the term for the early growth and development of a plant embryo inside a seed?
germination

Elements are either metals, nonmetals, or what?
semimetals

Shield volcanoes often form along which locations?
divergent plate boundaries

What is the study of the vital statistics of populations and how they change over time?
demography

Compared to free-floating bacteria, bacteria in biofilms often show increased resistance to what?
antibiotics and detergents

What type of energy travels in waves across space as well as through matter?
electromagnetic radiation

If an elephant and a boy are falling towards the ground, who will land first?
both same time

Designed to support the weight of the upper body when sitting and transfer this weight to the lower limbs when standing, what body structure consists of four bones: right and left hip bones, sacrum, and coccyx?
pelvis

Of all the electromagnetic waves, which have the lowest frequencies?
radio waves

What do you call reversible changes that do not change matter’s chemical makeup or chemical properties?
physical changes

Free atoms are spherical in shape, so the relative sizes of the elements can be compared by looking at each atom's atomic what?
radius

What types of energy is released during a chemical reaction?
heat, electricity, light

What is the most common type of organic compound?
carbohydrates

Hormones, ions, and neurotransmitters are all types of what?
chemical signals

What explains why water molecules tend to stick together?
hydrogen bonds

The maturing follicle, containing a fluid-filled cavity, enlarges, forming a bulge near the surface of what?
the ovary

Storm surge is very high water located in the low pressure eye of what?
hurricanes

What is a waste product from fossil fuel burning?
co2 emissions

Carbon dioxide is an example of a material that easily undergoes what?
sublimation

What is the term for daily cycles of behavior, like the sleep-wake cycle?
circadian rhythms

What organ senses sound?
ear

The total energy assimilated by an ecosystem in a give period is known as what?
gross primary production

Class bivalvia (“two shells”) includes clams, oysters, mussels, scallops, and these?
geoducks

When does a caldera form?
after an eruption

The mass lost in mass defect has gone into energy called what?
binding energy

What is used for the fermentation process that makes beer, wine, and bread?
yeast

Plant viruses can seriously disrupt crop growth and development, significantly affecting our what?
food supply

In the past, biologists grouped living organisms into five kingdoms: animals, plants, fungi, protists, and what?
bacteria

What kind of joints allow for a wide range of flexibility?
ball and socket

The human body wants to maintain equilibrium or balance, also known as what?
homeostasis

Natural gas, such as those burned by gas stoves, is composed mostly of this?
methane

Which is the process through which leaves collect sunlight and make food?
photosynthesis

What model describes the structure of the plasma membrane as a mosaic of components?
fluid mosaic model

The hot liquid rock on the surface is called what?
lava

The first consumption of breast milk or formula floods the newborn’s sterile gastrointestinal tract with beneficial what?
bacteria

Clouds are formed from what?
water droplets

After spermatids form, they move where to mature into sperm?
into the epididymis

Matter can exist either as a pure substance or as a combination of what?
different substances

What is the separation of compounds on the basis of their solubilities in a given solvent?
fractional crystallization

Triploblasts include a broad range of animals, from flatworms to arthropods to what?
vertebrates

What is the release of particles and/or energy from the nucleus of an atom described as?
radioactivity

Through which process do behaviors that improve fitness increase?
natural selection

Enzymes - proteins which speed up what?
chemical reactions

What do you call the sudden flow of mud down a slope because of gravity?
mudslide

What causes acid rain, ozone depletion, and global warming?
air pollution

The amniotes are distinguished from amphibians by the presence of a terrestrially adapted egg protected by what?
amniotic membranes

The cells of what basic plant structure lack chloroplasts?
root

What muscle in the chest helps inflate and deflate the lungs?
diaphragm

Where in the lungs does gas exchange between the air and blood takes place?
alveoli

What are hollow cylinders and are the thickest of the cytoskeleton structures?
microtubules

What simple sugar is the cell's primary source of energy?
glucose

What is the approximate population on the earth?
7 billion

A change in the sequence of bases in dna or rna is called a what?
mutation

What is the product of microfilament movement powered by chemical energy?
muscle contraction

What is a measure of how much energy is needed to change the temperature of a substance?
specific heat

What is the common term for animals in the phylum porifera?
sponges

What term is used to describe a change in the characteristics of living things over time?
evolution

What can accept a wide range of carbohydrates for catabolism?
glycolysis

What includes all living things within all their environments, including everywhere life exists, from the upper atmosphere, to the top of the soil, to ocean bottoms?
biosphere

What is unique and found in all living things because it can form up to four covalent bonds between atoms or molecules?
carbon

What kind of rock is gypsum?
sedimentary

What component of a prokaryote is unique in  molecular composition and mechanism of propulsion?
the flagella

The sum of the masses of the atoms in the formula is referred to as what?
molecular mass

What size of ring will a summer drought cause in a tree?
smaller

What is the technical term for species that produce their own body heat and regulate their internal temperature independently of the outside temperature?
endothermic

What is the transparent outer covering of the eye?
cornea

Photoreceptors in each ocellus receive light only through the opening where there are none of which cells?
pigmented

What helps form the walls of internal organs such as the heart and stomach?
muscles

How many valence electrons does helium have?
two

What is continuously changing within a circuit in an analog signal?
voltage

What is made and stored primarily in the cells of the liver and muscles?
glycogen

Electromagnetic waves vary in wavelength and in what property, which is lower in waves of longer wavelengths?
frequency

In the case of transverse waves, the movement of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of the what?
energy movement

Inserting an extra plane of atoms into a crystal lattice produces what?
edge dislocation

The core of a nuclear reactor generates a large amount of what type of energy from the decay of fission products, even when the power-producing fission chain reaction is turned off?
thermal

Electric current is measured in coulombs per second, also called what?
amperes

What is the name of the "point" that refers to the temperature at which water vapor condenses?
dew point

Body plans do provide a succinct way to compare and contrast what?
key animal features

Once classified as plants, fungi have chitin rather than cellulose in what cell structures?
cell walls

What type of oceans are hostile to algae and cytoplankton?
warmer

Organelles whose membranes are specialized for aerobic respiration are called what?
mitochondria

The regions of a material where the north and south poles of atoms are aligned are called what?
magnetic domains

What is another term for body chromosomes?
autosomes

Unlike amphibians, reptiles do not have what stage?
larval

What basic plant structure can add support and anchorage?
roots

Locus refers to the position of what on a chromosome, which controls the characteristics of an organism?
gene

Fish hatch into larvae that are different from the adult form of?
species

What kind of islands provide natural protection to shorelines?
barrier islands

Fruit-eating bats receive food from plants and, in return, help these plants by doing what?
spreading seeds

What is determined by the amount of energy in molecules?
state of matter

Biomass is the mass of biological what?
organisms

The primary nitrogenous waste material secreted by ureotelic animals is what substance?
urea

What system makes sure leaked blood returns back to the bloodstream?
lymphatic

Enthalpy changes are measured by using what?
calorimetry

The cell walls of fungi are made of what?
chitin

When blood engorged capillaries leak fluid into neighboring tissues, what occurs?
swelling

Will contour lines ever cross?
no

Species of organisms that have permanently died out can also be called what?
extinct

Are the majority of archaea chemotrophs or photosynthetic?
chemotrophs

Oxygen is essentially just a waste product of the light reactions of what?
photosynthesis

What is the process by which almost all plants make food?
photosynthesis

Some enzymes require the presence of a non-protein molecule to function properly. what is that molecule called?
cofactor

What stimulates the changes of pubery?
sex hormones

What are the male reproductive cells called?
sperm

What is one function of the nervous system in humans?
controlling muscles

What is the diversity of living things called?
biodiversity

What kind of mammalian reproduction is risky for the offspring but not the mother?
monotreme

What do we call the force of attraction or repulsion between electrically charged particles?
electromagnetic force

Mendeleev organized what basic units into rows and columns?
elements

What do you call compounds that have covalent bonds?
covalent compounds

What is the term for magma that erupts onto earth's surface?
lava

What changes nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrogen compounds that plants can absorb?
bacteria

In vertebrates, ovipary, ovovivipary, and vivipary are different strategies for what vital process?
reproduction

What waves do radio and television use?
radio waves

Which factor causes a cannon ball to move horizontally and then fall on the ground?
projectile motion

What do electrons lose during their transfer from organic compounds to oxygen?
potential energy

What are plastids that contain other pigments?
chromoplasts

Each species of legume is associated with a strain of __________
rhizobium

Algae convert energy from the sun into food by means of what process?
photosynthesis

Which process helps provide cleaner water for agriculture?
process of desalinization

What element is an essential part of many molecules needed by living organisms?
nitrogen

An atom is the smallest unit of what that maintains the identity of the latter?
element

When a solution freezes, only what particles come together to form a solid phase, while the presence of solute particles interferes with that process?
solvent

Liquefaction ccurs when the molecules of a gas are cooled to the point where they no longer possess sufficient kinetic energy to overcome what?
intermolecular attractive forces

What is the term for the series of life stages and events that a sexually reproducing organism goes through?
life cycle

What is absorbed from food waste in the large intestine before it passes out of the body as feces?
excess water

What do hydrocarbons consist of?
carbon and hydrogen

A major diversification of what animal group occurred about 50 million years ago, possibly spurred by worldwide climate change?
mammals

Like a house, your body has what kind of mechanism that responds to changes in temperature?
internal thermostat

An isometric type of what occurs as the muscle produces tension without changing the angle of a skeletal joint?
contraction

What are important coenzymes or precursors of coenzymes, and are required for enzymes to function properly?
vitamins

What have cell-surface antigen receptors for foreign molecules?
lymphocytes

In birds, modified front legs are actually what?
wings

The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time is called what?
frequency of a wave

How does litmus paper indicate the ph value of a solution?
by color

What is another term for movable joints?
synovial

What device is a magnetic disc that provides long-term storage for programs and data?
hard drive

Debroglie proposed in 1924 that any object exhibits a wavelength that is inversely proportional to its?
momentum

What travels at the interface between the sea surface and the atmosphere?
ocean waves

What is the only light that humans can see?
visible light

What directs the amino acids to be introduced into the growing protein chain in the proper sequence?
rna template

Cellular respiration in humans involves the combustion of what simple sugar?
glucose

What still causes fatal lung disease in nonsmokers?
tobacco smoke

Like ants and termites, they grow fungi inside the bark of trees and use it to help do what?
digest food

For fertilization to occur in angiosperms, pollen has to be transferred to the stigma of what?
flower

Exothermic reactions in organisms are called what?
catabolic reactions

Prior to birth, the lungs are filled with amniotic fluid, mucus, and what else?
surfactant

At what point during a chemical reaction is there no net change?
equilibrium

The solution with the higher solute concentration is called what?
hypertonic

The three stages of transcription are initiation, elongation, and what?
termination

A rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier is known as?
a cirque

Where do most cnidarians live?
ocean

What do a group of cells that work together form?
tissue

Plants alternate between haploid and what?
diploid

Temperature is a measure of the motion (kinetic energy) of what?
molecules

What method do scientists use to answer questions?
scientific method

What is the natural selection that favors altruistic behavior by enhancing reproductive success of relatives known as?
kin selection

When a male directly deposits sperm in a female during mating, this is considered what type of fertilization?
internal

What part of the body does the mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterium usually attack?
lungs

Conversely, very large forces are created by liquids and solids when they try to expand but are constrained from doing so—which is equivalent to compressing them to less than their normal volume. this often occurs when a contained material warms up, since most materials expand when they do this?
increase temperature

What helps regulate the production of urine?
the pituitary gland

In celsius, what is the temperature at which water freezes?
zero degrees

Which theory explains how materials can collide and become new materials?
collision theory

What 3 types of friction occur between solid surfaces?
static, sliding, rolling

Name the 3 ocean zones.
intertidal, pelagic, benthic

Secondary consumers are usually carnivores that eat what?
primary consumers

What is the term for a period when temperatures are cooler than normal causing glaciers to spread to lower latitudes?
ice age

Cody's velocity is zero so therefore he doesn't have what?
momentum

Human population is growing exponentially and humans have increased what normally limiting factor through technology, urbanization, and harnessing the energy of fossil fuels?
carrying capacity

Amides are carbonyls attached to one nitrogen atom and one carbon or which other atom?
hydrogen

The epidermis of the leaf consists of a single layer of which cells?
dermal cells

What is beneath the cerebrum and includes the thalamus and hypothalamus?
diencephalon

What is the raw material for evolution by natural selection called?
genetic variation

The changing of a light ray’s direction (loosely called bending) when it passes through variations in matter is called this?
refraction

What decreases with the loss of subsequent protons?
acid strength

What is defined as a loss of hydrogen atoms?
oxidation

Natural gas is often found along with what other fossil fuels in underground deposits?
coal and oil

What term is used to describe cells without a nucleus?
prokaryotic

What is used to carry out metric unit conversions?
dimensional analysis

If solutions of differing osmolarities are present on opposite sides of a semipermeable membrane, solvent will transfer from what to what, in terms of osmolarity of the solution?
low to high

What do populations gain through births and immigration?
individuals

What is it called when plants release water vapor through their leaves?
transpiration

What do you call the atomic "ingredients" that go into a chemical reaction?
reactants

What is stacked in layers in "layer cake geology"?
rock stata

A spontaneous change process called neutrino oscillations can occur only if neutrinos have what property?
mass

What type of plate is an island arc found on?
oceanic

How do you calculate the atomic mass of an element?
add the protons and neutrons together

The cytoskeleton is a cellular "scaffolding" or "skeleton" that crisscrosses what?
cytoplasm

In animal cells, what arises from the centrosomes and includes spindle microtubules and asters?
the spindle

What's the term for a relationship between two organisms where at least one benefits?
symbiosis

Drip iirigation requires less water and reduces what?
salinization

What term refers to a wall or partition that divides the heart into chambers?
septum

What mammal is the most intelligent?
humans

What is the primary force driving fluid transport between the capillaries and tissues?
hydrostatic pressure

Mercury is small, rocky and covered with what objects?
craters

Heat expansion is a result of the increase of what type of energy, exhibited by molecules bumping together?
kinetic energy

What is the molecular formula of carbon dioxide?
co 2

What organism constitutes frothy green "pond scum"?
algae

Spontaneous reactions release what type of energy, meaning it is available to do work?
free energy

Why do butterfly fish have fake eyespots?
confuse predators

Is urea or salt reabsorbed faster?
salt

Glucose is an example of what simple carboyhydrates with relatively few carbon atoms?
sugars

Chemical energy results from the particular arrangement of atoms in a chemical compound; the heat and light produced in this reaction are due to energy released during the breaking and reforming of what?
chemical bonds

The visible surface of the sun is called what?
photosphere

Which system is capable of responding quickly to changing situations?
nervous system

What two substances do plants give off when they make food?
oxygen and water

What kind of energy positions do electrons occupy during ground state?
lowest energy positions

What are metals and good electrical conductors that tend to lose their valence electrons in chemical reactions called?
reductants

What is the term for liquid water falling from the sky?
rain

What term did schrödinger use for regions around the nucleus where electrons are most likely to be?
orbitals

What exactly happens during rna translation?
protein is synthesized

How long are microfilaments?
7 nm

What is the area around the nucleus of an atom where electrons are likely to be, called?
electron cloud

What type of matter in the spinal cord has the appearance of an ink-blot test and is subdivided into regions that are referred to as horns?
gray matter

What type of sedimentary rocks are made of minerals that precipitate from saline water?
chemical sedimentary rocks

Sexual reproduction involves the production of haploid gametes by what?
meiosis

What is emitted by nuclei in alpha, beta, and gamma decay?
radiation

What do we call the recycling of inorganic matter between living organisms and their environment?
biogeochemical cycle

The tensor fascia latae acts as what, in relation to the gluteus medius and iliopsoas, for the purpose of flexing and abducting the thigh?
synergist

What cellular process is controlled by allosteric enzymes at key points in glycolysis and the citric acid cycle?
cellular respiration

What is the main function of the cardiovascular system?
transporting substances around the body

What happens to water when it is heated in the broiler?
it expands

What atoms make up a water molecule?
hydrogen and oxygen

What leads to the buildup of electric charges on objects?
polarization

What is it called when body’s internal environment is stable?
homeostasis

Precipitation, evaporation, transpiration, and condensation are part of what cycle?
water cycle

Life span is distinct from what, which means the sequence of stages a plant goes through from seed germination to seed production of the mature plant?
life cycle

What is it called when the soils of the arctic tundra remain in a perennially frozen state?
permafrost

The three classes of elements are metals, nonmetals, and what?
metalloids

What do you call the fixed point of a lever?
fulcrum

What process tends to be external in aquatic species and internal in terrestrial species?
fertilization

Which electromagnetic radiation is used to kill cancer cells?
gamma rays

What is the term for going into a dormant state during the winter?
hibernation

Shrimp are an example of what group within the arthropods?
crustaceans

Many enzymes are simple proteins consisting entirely of one or more of these?
amino acid chains

What property of carbon and other elements can be used to date fossils and rocks, among other things?
half-life

A solution is what type of mixture, where the dissolved particles are spread evenly through the mixture?
homogeneous

The base in an antacid reacts to do what to excess stomach acid?
neutralize it

In single-celled organisms, what does the plasma membrane extensions help the organisms to do?
move

Red-green color blindness is an example of a sex-linked condition caused by what?
recessive allele

What can be switched off by a protein called the trp repressor?
the operon

What is the name of vesicles that are formed by the golgi apparatus?
lysosomes

What is the term for the arrangement of veins in a leaf?
venation pattern

Anabolic reactions require energy, so they are considered what type of reaction?
endothermic

Lack of which attachment makes ester molecules incapable of intermolecular hydrogen bonding?
hydrogen-oxygen atom

Viruses need what kind of cell in order to help themselves reproduce?
host

Although vitamins and minerals do not provide what, they are still essential for good health?
energy

What is the science of how living things interact with each other and their environment?
ecology

What function does a vacuole do for a cell?
storage

Sight, hearing, balance, taste, smell, and touch are types of what?
senses

During grafting, the part of the plant that is grafted is called?
scion

What is a winding ridge of sand deposited by a stream of meltwater called?
esker

What is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object?
acceleration

Sympatric type of what occurs when a single population of organisms splits into two reproductively isolated communities within the same physical region?
speciation

Each atom has a required number of what?
covalent bonds

When the volume of a gas is decreased, what happens to its pressure?
increases

Exposure to what causes skin color to darken?
sunlight

What colorful phenomenon occurs in the northern sky when particles from the sun energize ions in the thermosphere?
northern lights

By what processes does the ocean modify landforms?
erosion and deposition

The term “vapor” refers to the gas phase when it exists at a temperature below what?
boiling temperature

Hypertension, or high blood pressure, can increase the risk of what?
cardiovascular disease

The carbon atoms are bonded together, with each carbon also being bonded to two of what kind of atoms?
hydrogen

What is the final stage of cell division in eukaryotes as well as prokaryotes?
cytokinesis

The metacarpophalangeal joints in the finger are examples of what kind of joints?
condyloid

What is idefined as the mass of a substance divided by its volume?
density

What does the kyoto protocol focus on controlling?
greenhouse gas emissions

A van de graff generator produces what type of charge on its dome, causing the tendency to give up electrons?
negative charge

What forms the small holes found in bread?
carbon dioxide gas

In order to conduct what, electrons must move from the filled valence band to the empty conduction band where they can move throughout the solid?
electricity

Conductive losses in the middle ear can be partially overcome by sending sound vibrations to what structure through the skull, the principle behind implants for hearing loss patients?
cochlea

What is the term for the fast-moving air currents high in the troposphere?
jet streams

Vibrating electric and magnetic fields make up what kinds of waves?
electromagnetic

What do you call the regular changes in biology or behavior that occur in a 24-hour cycle?
circadian rhythms

The electric and magnetic fields are closely related and propagate as what?
electromagnetic wave

What do you get by multiplying volume by the density of water?
mass of water

Plant-like protists are autotrophs capable of what process?
photosynthesis

What type of energy is useful to humans because it's ease of transport and conversion to other forms of energy?
electrical

When performing anaerobic exercise, your muscles work against what?
resistance

What type of doctor specializes in the laboratory detection of disease?
pathologist

The smallest unit of structure and function in all living organisms is what?
cell

Bilaterally symmetrical animals have both dorsal and what type of sides?
ventral

Which state of matter is not common on earth?
plasma

Which system of the body is responsible for bringing air into the body?
respiratory system

The photoreceptive cells of the eye, where transduction of light to nervous impulses occurs, are located in this?
retina

E. coli need what kind of acids to survive?
amino

Elements are defined by their atomic number, a number that describes the amount of what in the element?
protons

What laboratory instrument is used to analyze and test for static charge?
electroscope

Through a succession of mitotic cell divisions, what gives rise to a large number of cells?
zygote

Contour tillage helps slow water run-off and what process that causes topsoil loss?
soil erosion

In a scientific experiment, the variable that is affected by the other one is called what?
dependent variable

Cells must also be able to separate their relatively stable interior from what?
the external environment

For any given species, what term means the maximum population that can be supported by the environment?
carrying capacity

With an increased understanding of gene regulation and gene function, medicines can be designed to specifically target diseased cells without harming these?
healthy cells

The rate of a reaction can be expressed either in terms of the decrease in the amount of what or the increase in the amount of a product per unit time?
reactant

What do molecules need to do for a reaction to take place?
collide

What is the term for the change in temperature with distance?
temperature gradient

How many classes of biochemical compounds are there?
four

The fact that all animals have certain traits in common shows that they share what?
a common ancestor

Organisms that live in freshwater environments often possess a contractile vacuole that prevents cells from taking in too much water through what process?
osmosis

What is the condition in which the thyroid gland is overactive is known as?
hyperthyroidism

Where do amphibians lay their eggs?
in water

The food particles are caught by the collar of the choanocyte and brought into the cell by what process?
phagocytosis

In seedless vascular plants such as ferns, the sporophyte releases spores from the undersides of what basic plant structures?
leaves

There are two basic body plans in cnidarians which are called the polyp and what else?
medusa

In science, what is a bit of information that is true?
a fact

What kind of potentially harmful compounds can barbecuing food create?
carcinogens

Change in what equals the average net external force multiplied by the time this force acts?
momentum

What type of mammals are characterized by detailed development of the hands and feet, a shortened snout, and a large brain?
primates

What process allows an individual to develop from a single cell into an organism with trillions of cells?
cell division

What do you call the membrane-bounded droplets that have some properties of cells?
protocells

Bees are naturalized on every continent except which?
antarctica

In arthropods, coxal glands and malphigian tubules perform what role?
excretion

What is the ultimate source of energy for all life on earth?
the sun

What do you call compounds whose properties are different because their atoms are bonded together in different arrangements?
isomers

What celestial object has been visited by manned spacecraft and is easily seen from earth?
moon

What do you call a condition caused by mutations in one or more genes?
genetic disorder

What is the common term for erythrocytesare, specialized cells that circulate delivering oxygen to cells and are formed from stem cells in the bone marrow?
red blood cells

When do glaciers deposit their sediment?
when they melt

One of the earliest air pumps was made by?
robert boyle

Terrestrial biomes are determined mainly by what?
climate

What are scientists able to determine about stars using emission and absorption spectra?
composition

Scientists search for answers to questions and solutions to problems by using a procedure called this?
scientific method

What transmits nerve impulses to other cells?
neurons

The active transport of ions across the membrane causes an electrical gradient to build up across the what?
plasma membrane

What process determines which of two fossils is older or younger than the other?
relative dating

Under which process do living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring?
natural selection

Biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachioradialis work to flex what part of the body?
forearm

Cancer involves what changes that modify cell-cycle control and alter the growth rate or progression of the cell through the cell cycle?
mutations

Glucose, fructose, and galactose are hexose sugars, which contain six atoms of what element?
carbon

When an action and reaction occur, what is transferred from one object to the other, yet in combination it remains the same?
momentum

Which two planetary bodies have humans walked on?
earth and the moon

The pion can only be created by violating the conservation of what?
mass-energy

What are named for their “spiny skin”?
echinoderms

What is formed when sperm mixes with secretions from the various other glands of the reproductive system?
semen

Some plants have stolons, or stems, that run along the ground and are commonly called what?
runners

Clearing land for agriculture and development is a major cause of what negative result?
habitat destruction

What in the skin dilates, or widens, in order to increase blood flow to the bodys surface?
blood vessels

What burns to produce the white light in fireworks displays?
magnesium in air

Solids can be divided into amorphous solids and which other group?
crystalline solids

Some earthworms can also reproduce asexually by fragmentation followed by what?
regeneration

Most crustaceans have separate sexes, so they reproduce sexually using what?
eggs and sperm

Visible light is one type of this radiation?
electromagnetic

Double-replacement reactions generally occur between substances in what kind of solution?
aqueous

What happens to the recessive traits in the offspring of a hybridization?
they disappear

What is a small, spherical compartment separated by at least one lipid layer from the cytosol?
vesicle

What term is used to describe is the increased or decreased speed of movement of an organism in response to a stimulus?
orthokinesis

How can natural resources be classified from a human point of view?
renewable or nonrenewable

What are the two types of endoplasmic reticulum?
rough & smooth

We know from what type of waves produced by earthquakes that parts of the interior of the earth are liquid?
seismic

Radiocarbon is useful for dating relatively young materials with what element as their base?
carbon

Why are eutherian mammals sometimes called placental mammals?
complex placental connection

What is the name for the division of the cytoplasm in eukaryotic cells, resulting in two genetically identical daughter cells?
cytokinesis

How can you prevent food allergy symptoms?
avoid offending foods

Ground tissue forms the interior of the stem. the large central vacuoles of ground tissue cells fill with water to support the plant. the cells may also store what?
food

Insect wings are part of the exoskeleton and attached to the what?
thorax

What was the informal female name given to the adult fossil found in ethiopia and thought to be over 3 million years old?
lucy

What is the term for a formula that shows the elements in a compound in their lowest whole-number ratio?
empirical formula

What is defined as the spreading of white light into its full spectrum of wavelengths?
dispersion

What is used in the growth, development, functioning and reproduction of all known living organisms and many viruses?
dna

When methane burns, what is produced along with carbon dioxide?
water

What helps pumice float in water?
gas bubble holes

What land mammal has the longest gestation period?
african elephant

What sustains the fetus while it grows inside the mother’s uterus?
placenta

Two kinds of sex hormones are of particular importance in females: progesterone, which prepares the uterus for pregnancy and prevents the further release of eggs from the ovaries during pregnancy, and the estrogens, which are mainly responsible for the development of female secondary sexual characteristics, such as breast development and increased deposition of this?
fat

Zoonotic pathogens are transferred from what to what?
animals to humans

Restriction enzymes or restriction endonucleases are prokaryotic enzymes that recognize and cut what at specific sequences?
dna

What are chemical reactions represented by?
chemical equations

The length of the sloped surface of a ramp is referred to as what?
input distance

Producers, primary consumers, higher-level consumers, and decomposers are levels in what?
food chain

Parthenogenis in komodo dragons is an example of what kind of reproduction, whereby offspring are created from just one parent?
asexual reproduction

The value that occurs most often in a data set is called the?
mode

Over time, deposited sediments may harden into what?
rocks

What is the most useful quantity for counting particles?
the mole

What is the failure of replicated chromosomes during meiosis to separate known as?
nondisjunction

In angiosperms, flowers and fruits are adaptations essential for what process?
reproduction

Through what part do exocrine glands discharge their contents?
tubular ducts

Where do plankton, nekton, and benthos live?
in the oceans

What gland is a butterfly-shaped organ located in the neck anterior to the trachea?
thyroid gland

What cause the rippled surface of the ocean?
waves

What small glands are abundant within the mucous membranes of the mouth and tongue?
salivary glands

What is the term for the development of an embryo inside an egg within the mother’s body until it hatches?
ovovivipary

Where does carbohydrate digestion begin in the body?
mouth

When did new plants start sprouting after the forest fire?
two months later

What are the largest known proteins called?
titins

Metals, fossil fuels, and water are all examples of what type of resource?
natural resources

What is the force that causes centripetal acceleration?
centripetal force

Pressure and ________ are directly proportional at a constant volume?
temperature

What is the process by which plants capture the energy of sunlight and use carbon dioxide from the air (and water) to make their own food called?
photosynthesis

Categorized based on how they produce their mrna using the baltimore classification method, what consist of a nucleic acid core surrounded by a protein capsid with or without an outer lipid envelope?
viruses

Primary alcohols are oxidized to form what?
aldehydes

Where does electric power originate?
power plants

What type of fertilization do most reptiles use to reproduce?
internal

Visible light is part of what spectrum?
electromagnetic spectrum

Amino acids are made by which kind of plastid?
leucoplasts

The amount of power passed through transmission lines can be calculated by multiplying voltage by what?
current

When a balloon is rubbed against hair, they attract each other because of a difference in what?
charges

The cell starting meiosis is called a what?
primary oocyte

A wave is the transfer of energy through what else?
matter

What nest of cells protect the egg as it matures in the ovary?
the follicle

Why do beer brewers add yeast to the wort?
to make alcohol

Amino acids broken down by metabolic process are mostly recycled into new what?
proteins

What type of logic can lead to important conclusions from the collecting and analyzing of observations?
inductive reasoning

Screws move objects to a higher elevation by increasing what?
force applied

What is the second state of photosynthesis?
calvin cycle

What is the only amphibian without legs?
caecilians

Most organisms could not survive without what being present to speed up biochemical reactions?
enzymes

Metabolic cooperation between different prokaryotic species often occurs in surface-coating colonies. what are these colonies called?
biofilms

What word describes a carbonyl where the carbon atom makes single bonds with two others?
ketones

The concentration of hydronium ions in a solution is known as what?
acidity

What do we call structures that are similar in related organisms because they were inherited from a common ancestor?
homologous

What is continually released during childbirth through a positive feedback mechanism and prompts uterine contractions to fetal head toward the cervix?
oxytocin

What is the addition of nucleotides to the mrna strand?
elongation

Wave amplitude and wavelength are two important measures of what?
wave size

What is the color of mercury(ii) oxide?
red

How many hydrogen atoms does a nitrogen atom of a primary amine have?
two

What ultimately results in the cycling of nutrients in ecosystems?
interactions between organisms

Platforms, arches, and sea stacks are all landforms created by what?
erosion

The state of matter - solid, liquid, or gas - is also considered what type of property?
physical

Panting allows dogs to get rid of what?
excess body heat

What is the standard unit for mass?
kilogram

The planets orbit around what celestial body?
sun

What kind of behaviors are adaptive because they are flexible, capable of changing if the environment changes?
learned behavior

What is the term for a galaxy that is a rotating disk of stars and dust?
spiral galaxy

What occurs when a former inhabited area gets disturbed?
secondary succession

The chloroplasts contained within the green algal endosymbionts still are capable of what process associated with plants?
photosynthesis

What do seismic waves prove about the inner core?
it is solid

What is divided during cytokinesis?
cytoplasm

Materials such as metals have low resistance to electric current, what are they called?
electric conductors

An alloy is a mixture of what with one or more other substances?
metal

A can of warm soda will fizz more because increasing the temperature decreases the what of a gas?
solubility

What branch of biology studies animal behavior?
ethology

What does the esophagus connect to at its bottom end?
the stomach

Hair is a component of which bodily system?
integumentary system

What type of electrons are electrons that are not confined to the bond between two atoms?
delocalized

Electrons flow through wires to create what?
electric current

The ileocecal valve, a sphincter, is usually in a constricted state, but when motility in the ileum increases, this sphincter relaxes, allowing food residue to enter the first portion of what?
large intestine

A sequence of amino acids in single polypeptide is the primary structure for what?
proteins

What type of chemicals do ants communicate with?
pheromones

The age of a rock in years is its?
absolute age

What organ eliminates solid wastes that remain after the digestion of food?
the large intestine

What is the term for when a species no longer exists?
extinction

What is the jelly-like material in which the contents of the cell are suspended?
cytosol

What is the release of energy in the form of high energy electromagnetic waves?
gamma emission

Today, new elements are usually named after famous scientists. the names of the elements can be cumbersome to write in full, especially when combined to form the names of compounds. therefore, each element name is abbreviated as a one- or two-letter chemical this?
symbol

An infection may be intracellular or extracellular, depending on this?
pathogen

Like all tetrapods except birds and mammals, frogs possess a heart with what structure?
three chambers

Energy is the capacity to do work or to produce what?
heat

In mammals, sound waves are collected by the external, cartilaginous part of the ear called the pinna, then travel through the auditory canal and cause vibration of the thin diaphragm called the tympanum or this?
ear drum

Unlike ionic compounds, covalent compounds do not have freely moving what?
electrons

How do seed plants benefit from herbivores?
dispersal of seeds

What is the process in which cells make proteins called?
protein synthesis

How do you decrease errors in an experiment?
take many measurements

What term describes scientists who debate the origin of the earliest plants?
paleobotanists

What anatomical system is made up of neurons and glia?
nervous system

What term describes the overall ability of an animal to survive and produce offspring?
fitness

Production of abnormal white blood cells occurs in what cancer, which is the most common form in children?
leukemia

How is the energy of an atomic orbital affected as the principal quantum number increases?
it increases

During the typical human female ovulation cycles, how many eggs are released?
one

Spores are the basic reproductive units of what organism?
fungi

During diastole, what happens to the elastic walls of the arteries?
they snap back

Blood pressure is significantly affected by what physical force?
gravity

An electormagnet is a piece of iron inside a?
solenoid

What term describes motion that repeats itself at regular time intervals, such as exhibited by a vibrating guitar string?
periodic motion

What form do biofuels take that makes them very useful?
liquid

Most of food's chemical energy ultimately comes from what source?
sunlight

The northern spotted owl and the mexican spotted owl inhabit geographically separate locations with different climates and ecosystems. the owl is an example of?
allopatric speciation

Human actions such as plowing, logging, construction and other actions contribute to what kind of erosion?
soil erosion

Why does the fish odour diminish when you put lemon juice over cooked fish?
due to neutralization

When additional water is added to an aqueous solution, what happens to the concentration of that solution?
decreases

How many chambers does a mammalian heart have?
four

Meaning a disease that spreads from person to person, what term is synonymous with "contagious"?
infectious

The common carotid artery gives rise to the external and internal carotid arteries. the external carotid artery remains superficial and gives rise to many arteries of this?
head

What are resources that don't run out?
renewable resources

Maintaining a balance inside the body or cells of organisms is known as?
homeostasis

The ability to what is affected by the velocity, or speed, of the water?
erode

What is the process of isolating a specific gene and then making a copy of it for use in gene therapy?
gene cloning

The epochs of the universe are known back to very shortly after what 'explosive' event?
big bang

What is the term for a change in an object’s motion, which occurs whenever an object is acted upon by an unbalanced force?
acceleration

All metabolic functions carried out by a prokaryote take place in the plasma membrane or where else?
cytosol

How does burning matter affect its mass?
the mass remains the same

What type of stratified deposit is formed where lakes are covered by ice in the winter?
varves

Where do greenhouse gases trap heat?
atmosphere

The hamstrings flex the leg, whereas the quadriceps femoris have what effect?
extend

Many ceramics are composed of what, which are salts containing anions composed of silicon and oxygen?
silicates

Attaching strips of neutral metals that are higher in the activity series can protect a structure from what?
corrosion

Weight is a measure of what force pulling down on an object?
gravity

What organ absorbs about 90 percent of the water you ingest?
small intestine

In drosophila, gradients of morphogens encoded by maternal effect genes determine what?
body axes

What features of a salamander's skin help protect itself from predators ?
brightly colored and poisonous

Precipitation maps show the amount of what in different areas?
rainfall

What is a germ cell that divides into gametocytes during gametogenesis?
gametogonium

The saguaro doesn't have any leaves to lose water by which process?
transpiration

What is the most important source of energy on earth?
sun

What do cyclotrons use to cause particles to move in circular orbits?
magnetic field

An example of a variable relating to the ramp is its what?
steepness

Deep within the earth what force is so great that a rock behaves like a stretched rubber band?
pressure

What shape is the colony of a volvox cell?
hollow ball shaped

What do puffer fish produce to protect itself?
venom

What are polymers composed of many sugar building blocks called?
polysaccharides

Most gas molecules in the atmosphere are pulled close to earth’s surface by what force?
gravity

Coral reefs and tropical rainforests are ecosystems known for what, contributing greatly to the species in existence on earth?
biodiversity

Gymnosperms and angiosperms are types of _________ seed plants.
modern

Not getting enough calcium may cause what health problem?
osteoporosis

What is the sequence of elementary steps that together comprise an entire chemical reaction called?
reaction mechanism

What is the clear, curved structure that works with the cornea to help focus light at the back of the eye?
lens

What is the color of the powder of a mineral called?
streak

What part of the plant anchors it into the soil?
roots

Evolution happens because of what?
natural selection

The nephron is the functional unit of what pair of organs?
kidneys

Nonshivering thermogenesis, which involves the breakdown of brown adipose tissue, is a special methods newborns have for what purpose?
generating heat

What do you call a predator species that affects other species' populations when its own population size changes?
keystone species

What do you call the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that are involved in chemical bonds?
valence electrons

How many valence electrons do neutral phosphorus atoms have?
five

What impact does photosynthesis have on the direction of electron flow?
reverses it

In an experiment, what is kept constant so they will not affect the results, including affecting the dependent variable?
experimental controls

The rate of evaporation depends only on the surface area of the liquid and is essentially constant. the rate of condensation depends on the number of molecules in the vapor phase and increases steadily until it equals the rate of this?
evaporation

What are the two main types of diabetes?
type 1, type 2

What function does the longer flagellae perform in dinoflagellates?
propels

What are the three stages of water?
ice, liquid, vapor

What is the first stage of cellular respiration?
glycolysis

Roundworms are intervertebrates that belong to which phylum?
nematoda

The development of multi-cellular organisms begins from a single-celled zygote, which undergoes rapid cell division to form this?
blastula

While components of a mixture can be separated by physical means, the components of a pure substance can only be broken down through what means?
chemical

What is it called when pollen from one plant fertilizes another plant of the same species?
cross-pollination

Calcium hydroxide and calcium carbonate are effective in neutralizing the effects of what on lakes?
acid rain

Most of these bacterial illnesses can be prevented with proper cooking of food and washing what?
hands

If something is in the state of matter where it has both a definite shape and volume, then what state of matter is it in?
solid

What is the region known as the myelencephalon in the embryonic brain?
medulla

What involves the reaction of a hydrocarbon with oxygen gas to produce water and carbon dioxide?
combustion reactions

What law states that matter cannot be created or destroyed?
conservation of energy

The air bubbles resulting from cavitation expand and block water channels of the what?
xylem

Which gender typically experiences growth spurts first?
female

What are the only organisms that can decompose wood?
fungi

What part of the plant do nutrients enter?
the roots

What is a solid particle that is indestructible?
atom

Activated macrophages and neutrophils discharge what that signals molecules that enhance an immune response?
cytokines

The extracellular fluid is in contact with the axon membrane only at what location?
the nodes

Muscarinic receptors can cause both depolarization or hyperpolarization depending on the what?
subtype

What does rising air do when it reaches the top of the troposphere?
cools

The what is the number of wave cycles that pass a specified point in space in a specified amount of time?
frequency

Intermediate filaments tend to give the structural stability to what?
cells

What is the process in which a layer of a second metal is deposited on the metal electrode that acts as the cathode during electrolysis?
electroplating

What is the term for diseases in which blood does not clot normally?
hemophilia

Cardiomyocytes are striated muscle cells found where?
in cardiac tissue

Which protein, that stores oxygen in muscle cells, has been purified from a number of organisms?
myoglobin

A membrane has what property if it can control what molecules or ions enter or leave the cell?
selective permeability

What is the term for the amount of space taken up by an object?
volume

What is the most common form of cancer in women?
breast cancer

Exposure to what is the most common cause of hearing loss?
loud sounds

What basic plant structures generally have large surface areas and high surface-to-volume ratios?
leaves

What is the main component of phytoplankton?
algae

Metabolic enzymes catalyze catabolic reactions that break down what?
carbohydrates

Ponds and lakes are examples of what kind of biome?
standing freshwater biome

The skeletons of humans and horses are examples of what?
endoskeletons

What type of tissue transports water, nutrients, and food in plants?
vascular tissue

Stomata are special pores that allow gasses to enter and exit what?
the leaf

What is created when the wave source moves faster than the wave propagation speed?
bow wake

In a transverse wave, the highest point the wave reaches is known as the?
crest

Which orbitals do electrons fill first?
closest to the nucleus

Many discrete characters are determined by a single gene locus with different alleles that produce distinct what?
phenotypes

What is the hardest type of coal?
anthracite

All cells have voltages across their what?
plasma membranes

Which is the largest planet in our solar system?
jupiter

A crucial function of the cranial nerves is to keep visual stimuli centered on the fovea of what eye structure?
retina

In what process is energy from the sun converted to stored chemical energy in an organism?
photosynthesis

Sunlight gives plants the energy they need for what?
photosynthesis

What is lowered when salts go into ion form?
resistance

What is produced during the hydrogenation of vegetable oils?
trans fatty acids

Where does fertilization usually take place?
fallopian tubes

What monitors the level of carbon dioxide in the blood?
the brain stem

When volume does not change, temperature is proportional to what other property?
pressure

Single-displacement reactions are a subset of what?
redox reactions

What is the process by which the substances you consume are taken up by the blood?
absorption

Why do electronegativities decrease from top to bottom?
larger atomic size

What are the three types of symbiosis?
mutualism, parasitism, commensalism

What term is used to describe the ability to change or move matter?
energy

What measures exactly how much gravity is pulling on something?
weight

Where do producers in an ecosystem generally get their energy from?
the sun

Generators usually transform kinetic energy into what kind of energy?
electrical energy

Most modern seed plants are angiosperms that produce seeds in the what of flowers?
ovaries

Most enzymes are classified as what?
proteins

Each hemisphere of the brain contains regions called what that are involved in different functions?
lobes

Emphysema is a chronic disease caused by the breakdown of the what tissue?
lung

Lactose is a disaccharide consisting of the monomers glucose and what?
galactose

Why does photosynthesis not occur in the deep-water zone?
it is dark

What, now former, planet is small, icy, and rocky?
pluto

What process allows plants to convert light energy into sugars and energy for food?
photosynthesis

What is the equation of power released?
voltage x current

Silencing genes through epigenetic mechanisms is commonly practiced on what type of uncontrolled cells?
cancer cells

Along with muscles, what helps the body move with relatively little force?
joints

What process do all species use to make the next generation?
reproduction

According to one of einstein's theory, while light consists of particles, it behaves like this.
waves

Soil forms where land areas are what?
flat

An estimated 99 percent of the species that have ever lived on earth no longer exist, showing that what event is common?
extinction

What type of energy is the energy of moving matter?
kinetic energy

What does bile help to digest ?
fat

A gene may have different versions called what?
alleles

Nonvascular plants lack  vascular tissue and what?
seeds

What is a mixture of metal with one or more other elements?
an alloy

Pheromones enable what, which is vital for organisms like ants that live in a large community?
communication

What is the part of the shadow that is partially lit called?
penumbra

When a mountain stream flows onto flatter land and comes to a stop rapidly, what do the deposits form?
alluvial fan

The processes of homeostasis and temperature control are centered in the hypothalamus of the advanced animal brain, thus thermoregulation depends on what organ system?
nervous system

Light from objects at different distances is focused by what part of the eye?
lens

Breaking a window with a baseball is an example of what kind of change in matter?
physical

Scientists will often observe and then what the reason why a phenomenon occurred?
hypothesize

Similar to the coil on a stove, changes in what reflect an increase in the temperature of a star?
color

Proto-oncogenes are positive cell-cycle regulators but when mutated, they can become what?
oncogenes and cause cancer

When the maximum amount of solute has been dissolved in a given amount of solvent, we say that the solution is what?
saturated

What is the movement of substances across the membrane without the expenditure of cellular energy called?
passive transport

What energy, produced by vibrations, cannot travel through empty space?
sound

According to rutherford, where is the vast majority of the mass of an atom located?
the nucleus

What is the term for organisms that make their own food?
autotrophs

What happens to neutral matter when electrons are transferred between objects?
it becomes charged

Seawalls and breakwaters are built parallel to what?
shore

What is the term for the loss of one or more electrons by an atom?
oxidation

What are the lipids containing phosphorus?
phospholipids

Ethers readily dissolve what type of molecules?
non-polar

What are bones made up of?
tissues

When it is winter in the northern hemisphere the southern hemisphere experiences which season?
summer

What happens when liquid water evaporates?
humidity happens

What vision defect occurs because the eye is too long?
myopia

What happens when a neutral atom gains or loses electrons?
it becomes an ion

Why are goose feathers preferred for stuffing by manufacturers?
softness

What is the outermost part of the sun's atmosphere called?
corona

What is the series of changes in the life of an organism?
life cycle

The outer planets are made of hydrogen and helium, so they are termed what?
gas giants

When a liquid is heated, molecules with enough kinetic energy escape the liquid and become what?
vapor

What property of an object is obtained by multiplying its mass and its velocity?
momentum

Solutions that are prepared in which a solute concentration exceeds its solubility are called what?
supersaturated

The word fungus comes from the latin word for what?
mushroom

The part of a plant that is responsible for reproduction is the?
flower

Isotopes have the same number of protons and electrons, but a different number of what?
neutrons

Shivering and adipose tissue called brown fat are used by mammals in particular to produce what?
heat

Where are the somas of sensory neurons located in the spinal cord?
dorsal root ganglia

The thick tunica media allows muscular arteries to play a leading role in what?
vasoconstriction

Why do crystals have relatively sharp and well-defined melting points?
uniform intermolecular forces

In which area does conduction mainly happen?
lower atmosphere

What is secreted by the cells surrounding spermatogonia to help sperm production?
testosterone

Chemical reactions either require or release what?
energy

Energy that is released when a chemical reaction takes place is known as what?
chemical energy

What is the largest object in the solar system?
the sun

In ovoviviparous fish like shark, what develops inside the mother’s body but without nourishment from the mother?
eggs

What is the term for a technique used to separate out homogeneous mixtures in which one or more solids are dissolved in a liquid?
evaporation

How do basal mammals like monotreme reproduce?
by laying eggs

Abundant in unpolluted ponds and streams, planarians prey on smaller animals or feed on?
dead animals

What does parasitic mean?
lives in host

What scientist constructed a tree diagram, separating living organisms into three domains?
carl woese

Most of the genes in the eukaryotic cell are found where?
the nucleus

What are known as the building blocks of proteins?
amino acids

What are the three types of muscle tissue in the body?
skeletal, cardiac, smooth

The white mountains in new hampshire are part of what province?
appalachian

What is the ratio of the uncertainty to the measured value, multiplied by one-hundred called?
percent uncertainty

What is produced by the sebaceous glands?
sebum

What do you call vesicle transport into the cell?
endocytosis

What are daily changes in the level of ocean water called?
tides

What is the name of the narrow tube that begins at the stomach and ends at the large intestine?
small intestine

What is the term for how close a measurement is to the true value?
accuracy

What are the two most abundant elements in the universe?
hydrogen and helium

What is the term for  a close relationship between two species in which at least one species benefits.
symbiosis

Atomic emission spectra are produced when excited electrons return to what state?
ground state

The lungs perform gas exchange using air and what fluid, which is coming and going from the heart?
blood

In addition to glucose, what gas is used during cellular respiration?
oxygen

Which germ layers are essential for animal embryos to grow and develop into a body?
endoderm, ectoderm, mesoderm

Scrubbers and catalytic converters are examples of technologies that change what into harmless compounds?
pollutants

What is the weighted average of the masses of all isotopes of an element called?
atomic mass

The ability of a water spider to walk across a body of water is an example of what?
surface tension

What are compounds with the same molecular formula but different structures and properties called?
isomers

What happens when the blood cannot reach the heart because a blood vessel is blocked?
heart attack

What kind of solid is characterized by an unorganized and unpredictable structure?
amorphous

An object with more mass has greater thermal energy than an object with less mass because it has more what?
atoms

Ether molecules have an oxygen atom and can engage in hydrogen bonding with which other molecules?
water

What basic structures of the nervous system innervate the muscles of the respiratory system and are responsible for controlling and regulating pulmonary ventilation?
neurons

Pollutants in surface water can filter into the ground and enter a what?
groundwater aquifer

What is the most common cause of dwarfism?
achondroplasia

What describes how much matter is in a certain amount of space?
density

Axons pass what on to other cells?
nerve impulses

Sister chromatids separate and move to opposite poles of the cell in the third phase of what process?
mitosis

What is the distance that sound waves travel in a given amount of time called?
speed of sound

What would you call a relationship where the bacteria benefit and and the other organism is harmed?
parasitism

What is the supply of water to land or crops to help growth called?
irrigation

What form of matter has neither a definite shape nor a definite volume?
gas

Which stage has already been completed by the time sea urchin eggs are released from the female?
meiosis

Unlike pure substances, mixtures have a what?
variable composition

What process does not cause a rock to melt completely, instead causing the minerals to change by heat or pressure?
metamorphism

A disaccharide is a pair of monosaccharides. disaccharides are formed via dehydration synthesis, and the bond linking them is referred to as a glycosidic bond (glyco- = “sugar”). three disaccharides (shown in figure 2.19) are important to humans. these are sucrose, commonly referred to as table sugar; lactose, or milk sugar; and maltose, or this?
malt sugar

At what age is skeletal maturity reached by humans?
20

What is most of earth's surface covered with?
water

What is the sac-like organ of the body that is important for both mechanical and chemical digestion?
stomach

All chemical reactions require what to get started?
activation energy

Mitosis is nuclear division during which duplicated chromosomes are segregated and distributed into what?
daughter nuclei

Movement of water and minerals in the xylem solutes, pressure, gravity, and matric potential are all important for what?
plant water transport

The temperature of the box is related to the average speed of what?
molecules

What are organisms that eat just one type of food?
specialists

Mechanisms for establishing cellular asymmetries include morphogen gradients, localized determinants, and what other type of interactions?
inductive

Biodiversity hot spots are prime candidates for protection because they are prone to what species fate?
extinction

What are single-celled or colonial organisms that do not have membranebound nuclei?
prokaryotes

Differences in density between water and air lead to differences in what?
pressure

What organizational tool, arguably the best in all of science, lists all the known chemical elements, arranged by atomic number?
periodic table

Solvation involves surrounding ions with what?
solvent particles

The appendicular skeleton includes all bones of the upper and lower limbs, plus the bones that attach each limb to the what?
axial skeleton

Cow manure can have a second life as a source of what gas?
methane

Eggs reside in the mesohyl, but sperm are carried out of the sponge by what?
water current

Population size influences the chances of a species surviving, with very small populations generally at greatest risk of what fate?
extinction

Sound is the transfer of energy from a vibrating object in waves that travel through what?
matter

Sterols are a subgroup of what?
steroids

Cardiac muscle is only found where?
heart

What process provides over 99 percent of the energy for life on earth?
photosynthesis

Unlike energy, what doesn’t need to be constantly added to ecosystems because it is recycled through ecosystems?
matter

A colloid is a homogeneous mixture with medium-sized what?
particles

What causes rivers to always flow downhill?
gravity

What elements do water and hydrogen peroxide consist of?
hydrogen and oxygen

Name the virus that causes cold sores.
herpes virus

Cardiac veins parallel the small cardiac arteries and generally drain into what sinus?
coronary

What is a dip slip fault where the dip of the fault plane is vertical?
strike-slip

The major entrance and exit for the respiratory system is which facial orifice?
nose

Sexual reproduction is the combination of (usually haploid) reproductive cells from two individuals to form a third (usually diploid) unique offspring. sexual reproduction produces offspring with novel combinations of what?
genes

What kind of reproduction involves just one parent and produces offspring genetically identical to each other and to the parent?
asexual reproduction

What do you call the hard case that surrounds the soft parts of some animals?
exoskeleton

Choosing to not smoke and using sunscreen are examples of lifestyle choices that help prevent forms of what disease?
cancer

What is said about the speed of rotation in systems that create tornadoes?
it is slow

In gas exchange, oxygen flows into the blood, and what flows out?
carbon dioxide

What happens during the process of digestion?
breakdown of food

What do you call the folded layers of rock where geologists look for oil?
anticlines

Cutting forests and clearing land has also increased the amount of what in the atmosphere?
carbon dioxide

Microevolution occurs in a population when what frequencies change over time?
allele

What is the alkaline hydrolysis reaction of an ester called?
saponification

What is the time interval required for one complete wave to pass a point called?
period

Plant-like protists are autotrophs, meaning they make their own what?
food

In what form do plants and animals store sugar for later use?
storage polysaccharides

What forces the fetus out of the uterus?
continuous strong contractions

The large and small intestine are both divided into how many parts?
3

If everything in a system stays the same but the pressure deceases, gas bubbles will change in what way?
they get bigger

What do you call the transfer of thermal energy?
heat

The outer layer of what anatomical structure is so tough that it keeps out most pathogens?
skin

The process of a liquid becoming a gas is called boiling, while the process of a solid becoming a gas is called what?
sublimation

How does the nucleus divide during nuclear fission?
asymmetrically

How do heavy alkanes affect the skin?
form a protective layer

If an electric current passes through water, water molecules break down into molecules of what?
hydrogen and oxygen

What makes luminous dials glow in the dark?
phosphorescent substances

What liquid is referred to as the "universal solvent"?
water

What is the active ingredient in cloves?
eugenol

What term means the adjusting of systems within a cell in order to restore balance or maintain equilibrium?
homeostatic regulation

What is the name of the formation that regulates sleep and arousal?
reticular formation

What do the gonadotropins regulate?
gametogenesis

Valence electrons also determine how well—if at all—the atoms of an element conduct what?
electricity

What celestial bodies are born in clouds of gas and dust called nebulas?
stars

What does a hydrolase use to split molecules?
water

What term is used to describe the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid?
convection

What is the source of precipitation?
the atmosphere

How does bacteria reproduce?
binary fission

What causes holes in bread?
yeast fermentation

Which bone is derived from the fusion of four very small coccygeal vertebrae?
coccyx

Researchers have long based their hypotheses about animal phylogeny on what?
morphological data

The body does not exist in isolation. there is a constant input of water and electrolytes into the system. while osmoregulation is achieved across membranes within the body, excess electrolytes and wastes are transported to the kidneys and excreted, helping to maintain this?
osmotic balance

If a sperm fertilizes an egg of a seed plant, the zygote grows into what?
sporophyte embryo

Metabolism produces waste energy in the form of heat, which helps what type of animal conserve and maintain heat at a relatively constant body temperature?
warm-blooded (endotherm)

Electromagnets can be turned on or off and their strength can be changed by controlling what?
electric current

In which part of a bird stomach is food stored, soaked and mechanically ground?
gizzard

Physical science can be defined as the study of matter and what?
energy

What is the term for animals that defend their area?
territorial

What is the main reason for weather change?
moving air masses

Most lipids in your diet should be what type, found mainly in plant sources and also in fish?
unsaturated

Crude oil is a mixture of different types of what?
hydrocarbons

What is the representative particle in pure metals?
the atom

What takes place in the organelle known as the chloroplast, which distinguishes animal from plant cells?
photosynthesis

Organic and biochemical equations show the initial and final products of the equation, respectively known as the reactants and what else?
products

What is used during every step of oil production, from exploration to distribution?
energy

When do the eggs in a female's ovaries start to mature?
puberty

Drilling wells into hot rocks to release hot water or steam is an example of what kind of power plant?
geothermal

What is the state of matter that resembles a gas but has certain properties that a gas does not have called?
plasma

What enthalpy change is observed in an exothermic reaction?
negative

What does hypoxic mean?
low oxygen

Who has proposed that cigarette advertising in all media be banned entirely?
antismoking groups

What is the reaction called when an acid and a base react?
neutralization

What is the term for when clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water?
sedimentation

A wildfire clears a forest of vegetation and animal life, returning their nutrients to the ground leaving a foundation for rapid recolonization. what is this a classic example of?
secondary succession

What system of the body can specifically protect you from pathogens and other things that might make you ill?
immune

During glycolysis, each glucose molecule is broken down into two molecules of what compound?
pyruvate

The single circular dna chromosome of bacteria is not enclosed in what, but instead occupies a specific location called the nucleoid within the cell?
nucleus

Plaque is surgically removed from the walls of a vessel in which surgery?
endarterectomy

Where does most of the earth's energy come from?
sun

What is the primary energy source for cells?
glucose

What is a simple sugar such as fructose or glucose?
monosaccharide

Gram-negative bacteria have a cell wall made of peptidoglycan, whereas gram-positive bacteria have a cell wall made of what?
lipoteichoic acid

What term is used to describe muscle fibers that allows muscles to contract?
organelle

What are the main organs for breathing in a mammal?
lungs

What class of animals have four limbs and produce amniotic eggs?
mammals

No chemical process on the planet can match the output of what process?
photosynthesis

Which disease afflicts children who don't get enough calcium during their bone formation stage?
rickets

What kind of reactions between an acid and a base yield a salt and water?
neutralization

What human bodily function does cellulose help with?
moves food wastes

What are large vesicles derived from the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus?
vacuoles

The burning of charcoal is what type of reaction?
combustion

What is responsible for the physical changes of puberty?
testosterone

Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes have what?
cell nucleus

An electron is accelerated from rest through a potential difference of what?
volts

What is the most commonly used source of energy in the world?
oil

Silk and cotton are examples of what type of fibers?
natural

Tuna have been shown to contain high levels of what metal?
mercury

What does the esophagus produce for lubrication?
mucous

What type of amplitudes and wavelengths avoid detection in deep water?
low and long

What is the smallest main part of the brain?
the stem

Adding the number of protons plus the number of neutrons in an atom, decides it's approximate mass, what is another word for this value?
atomic number

Why do people build dams and levees?
prevent flooding

What runs through the penis and opens to the outside at the tip of the penis?
the urethra

What is the chemical name of table sugar?
sucrose

What enzyme is found in the small intestine catalyzes the hydrolysis of lactose?
lactase

While smooth muscle tissue can regenerate from stem cells called pericytes, dead cardiac muscle tissue is replaced by what type of tissue?
scar tissue

What natural process allows water to return again to the earth’s surface?
precipitation

What is a spectrometer able to produce from starlight?
spectrum

Without what food chain component, organic wastes and dead organisms would pile up everywhere, and their nutrients would no longer be recycled?
decomposers

What are made on ribosomes in the cytoplasm?
proteins

How do you test a hypothesis?
conduct experiments

What kind of power plant uses energy to heat water that becomes steam and spins turbines?
nuclear power plants

What is defined as the product of a force times the distance over which the force acts?
work

Visible light has what that can be detected by the human eye?
wavelengths

Chemical elements and water are recycled through what cycle?
biogeochemical

The anterior muscles of the neck facilitate swallowing and what else?
speech

How many directions can ions flow along the axon?
one

Ionic, covalent, and hydrogen are three important types of what type of interaction between different types of atoms?
bonds

In classical physics, momentum is a simple product of mass and this?
velocity

What compounds contain only carbon and hydrogen?
hydrocarbons

Synthetic and natural rubber, styrofoam and plastic are examples of organic what?
polymers

Some viruses carry a few viral enzyme molecules within their what?
capsids

Dietary proteins are broken down into what components when food is digested?
amino acids

What kind of plants do not need adaptations for absorbing, transporting, and conserving water?
aquatic plants

Organisms cannot live alone, needing other organisms to survive; what is this relationship called?
interdependence

What force pulls bodies with mass together?
gravity

If a fixed amount of gas maintains a perfectly inversely proportional relationship between volume and pressure, then what else must be constant about the gas?
temperature

What conveys signals received by the eye to the brain?
optic nerve

When cardiac muscle contracts, the heart does what?
pumps blood

Do placental mammals give birth to relatively small or large fetuses?
large

What is the largest class of elements?
metals

Liquid hcl can be used to do what to the ph of a swimming pool?
lower it

The three greatest proximate threats to biodiversity are habitat loss, overharvesting, and introduction of what?
exotic species

The sun’s energy is converted to chemical energy by a what?
plant

What are antacids comprised of?
bases

Where can neurohormones act within the body?
throughout

What are composed of a phosphate group, a sugar, and one of five different nitrogenous bases.
nucleotides

Scientists measure the gases that escape from a volcano to predict what?
eruptions

What molecule is made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom?
water

What occurs when muscle fibers get shorter?
muscle contraction

The nitrogen cycle includes air, soil, and what?
living things

As the organism grows more sophisticated, what happens to the process of gene regulation?
becomes more complex

Rh antibodies can prove dangerous if they cross what barrier in pregnancy?
placental

Galaxies can be spiral, elliptical, or which other type?
irregular

What often involves the loss of hydrogen, the gain of oxygen, or the loss of electrons?
oxidation

Luster, malleability, ductility, and conductivity are all properties of which kind of material?
metals

Anosmia, the loss of what sense, is often the result of the olfactory nerve being severed?
smell

Which planet is the kuiper belt closest to?
neptune

Does warm air sit above or below cooler air in the troposphere?
below

What is the name for the stratospheric gas layer that protects living things from uv radiation?
ozone layer

All atoms have equal numbers of what two particles?
electrons and protons

What is the only planet that rotates clockwise as viewed from its north pole?
venus

Most radioactive emissions that people are exposed to are on the order of a few dozen what?
millirems

What decay produces helium nuclei?
alpha decay

Instead of wood, what do some fireplaces use?
propane

What is the sum of all biochemical reactions in cells called?
metabolism

What process is magnesium important to?
photosynthetic

What type of shots do people with allergy get?
allergy shots

Where do polychaete worms live?
the ocean floor

What kind of material that might otherwise go to a landfill can serve as the source of biomass power?
organic waste

What was the appendix used for in the past but is no longer needed for?
digest food

Dermal, vascular, and ground tissue make up what part of a plant, which bears the leaves, flowers and fruits?
stem

What term is used to describe the conditions in the sky on any particular day?
weather

What does the human body produce to help digest food?
enzymes

What is a coil of wire with electric current flowing through it called?
a solenoid

What type of young do scorpions produce?
live

The chloroplast integrates the two stages of what process?
photosynthesis

What is the name for the amount of water vapor in the air?
humidity

What is the body system that digests food mechanically and chemically and absorbs nutrients?
digestive system

What is measured with a personal dosimeter?
exposure to radioactivity

Which plants sometimes colonize areas by disrupting interactions between native organisms?
invasive exotic plants

What are electromagnetic waves with the longest wavelengths called?
radio waves

Resonance has been used in what kind of human-made recreational objects since prehistoric times?
musical instruments

What is the strength of an earthquake called?
magnitude

What organs need constant pressure to filter the blood?
kidneys

After an infection has been brought under control and most cytotoxic t cells die off, a few remain as what?
memory cells

How do lancelets reproduce?
sexually

What is the storage form of glucose in humans and other vertebrates?
glycogen

What two factors influence the pressure of fluids?
depth and density

Although it is the easiest to observe, what property is not ideal as a sole way to identify minerals?
color

Where are bile acids, needed to emulsify lipids, stored in the body?
gallbladder

What type of molecule is first broken down in cellular respiration?
glucose molecule

The rate at which the body uses food energy to sustain life and to do different activities is called the what?
metabolic rate

How many valence electrons does carbon have?
four

What word describes a molecule that repels polar water?
hydrophobic

Which pollution can cause lung cancer and can also make asthma and other diseases worse?
air pollution

Counterweights and diagonal steel beams are used in buildings to hold down what?
sway

The major component of what cellular structures is the phospholipid bilayer?
cell membranes

The cytoskeleton crisscrosses the cytoplasm, this gives what to the cell?
internal framework

Initiation, elongation, and termination are the three steps of what?
transcription

What do we call the most widely accepted cosmological explanation of how the universe formed?
big bang theory

Angiosperms possess reproductive structures that attract animals that perform what role?
pollination

What kind of tissue consists of trabeculae and forms the inner layer of all bones?
spongy bone tissue

What is the most important factor in determining the type of soil that forms in a particular area?
climate

Energy constantly changes back and forth between kinetic and what type of energy?
potential

The tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion is called what?
inertia

When land used for mining or other purposes is restored to its natural state, what do you call the process, which is often mandated by law?
reclamation

There are how many visual clues to indicate a chemical reaction?
four

Genetic traits are characteristics encoded in what?
dna

In 1802, charles and gay-lussac both proposed that for a fixed amount of gas at a constant pressure, what is directly proportional to its absolute temperature?
volume

What material is transported in a process called longshore drift?
sediment

What has has revolutionized biological and biomedical research and applications?
polymerase chain reaction

Electrons are organized into shells and subshells about the nucleus of this?
atom

What is the double-membrane structure that constitutes the outermost portion of the nucleus?
nuclear envelope

Each daughter cell represents one outcome of all possible combinations of maternal and paternal what?
chromosomes

What is the science of classifying the many organisms on earth called?
taxonomy

Platelets play a role in what cascade of reactions that converts plasma fibrinogen to fibrin?
blood clotting

What force includes forces of attraction and repulsion?
magnetic force

How many atoms of oxygen does silicon dioxide contain?
two

A transformer has two coils, electrically insulated from each other. one coil is called the primary coil and the other is called the what?
secondary coil

What state of matter is characterized by tiny particles separated by large distances, which do not experience any force of attraction or repulsion with each other?
gas

Where are unsaturated fatty acids commonly found?
oil

Why is gingko biloba planted in public spaces?
resistant to pollution

What term means a representation of an object, system, or process?
model

What makes metals shiny?
light reflection

What are materials that have high resistance to electric current called?
electric insulators

Which system in your body stores urine and is controlled by the nervous system?
urinary system

Which type of isomers generally have lower boiling and melting points than straight-chain isomers?
branched-chain isomers

Which temperature scale is commonly used in science?
kelvin scale

What is required for both the synthesis and breakdown of molecules?
energy

Parasites usually harm their hosts (or they wouldn't be parasites), but what do they usually stop short of doing?
killing their host

What basic structures are the site of all the life functions of an organism?
cells

From where have the earliest ocean plants thought to have evolved?
green alga ancestor

The liver has three main components: hepatocytes, bile canaliculi, and this?
hepatic sinusoids

What bone is is one of a pair that together form the upper jaw, much of the hard palate, the medial floor of the orbit, and the lateral base of the nose?
maxillary bone

When a rock is altered by heat from a nearby magma, what occurs?
contact metamorphism

Which is one of the most complicated parts of gene regulation in eukaryotic cells?
start of transcription

How is thermal energy transferred in every-day, real life situations, such as holding a warm cup?
conduction

What consists of all the biotic and abiotic factors in an area and their interactions?
ecosystem

What is the theory scientists use to explain the matter in the universe and how it's held together?
standard model

In what group of animals several forms of asexual reproduction are found?
invertebrates

After the amino acid molecule has been bound to its what, protein synthesis can take place?
trna carrier

The conversion of food that is consumed to nutrients involves what two major processes:
digestion and absorption

What is the unsorted pile of material dropped by glaciers called?
glacial till

Each proton has how many units of positive charge?
one

Because charges must have an unbroken path to follow, electric current cannot flow through a material unless it forms what?
closed loop

In living systems, diffusion of substances into and out of cells is mediated by the what membrane?
plasma

Ancient greeks mistook what simple sedentary animals for plants?
sponges

What trimester is associated with rapid fetal growth?
third trimester

What are all scientific explanations and interpretations based on?
facts

What is the process in which an atom becomes an ion known as?
ionization

What are two examples of lipids?
fats and oils

What can radioactive strontium replace in the human body making it dangerous?
calcium

Silicon with an element that gives it extra electrons is which type of semiconductor?
n-type

Cold sores, influenza, and the common cold are all?
viral infections

What helps to propel sponge larvae through the water?
cilia

The majority of cells in blood are erythrocytes or?
red blood cells

Which gases trap heat in the atmosphere?
greenhouse

The arrangement of what plant structures can be classified as either alternate, spiral, or opposite?
leaves

Acceleration is defined as the change in what over time?
velocity

Some protists absorb nutrients from decaying matter like a what?
fungus

What noble gas follows hydrogen on the periodic table?
helium

What is the order and family of a meat-eating cat like a tiger?
carnivora felidae

What is required between cytoskeleton and motor proteins for cell motility?
interaction

Underground rock in a molten state is called?
magma

What takes over the synthesis and secretion of progesterone throughout pregnancy as the corpus luteum degenerates?
placenta

Distillation is an effective method to separate mixtures comprised of two or more what?
pure liquids

Aids is an infectious disease of which system?
immune

Where are the olfactory organs of snails located?
their tentacles

What is the term for a pure substance that possesses unique properties and cannot be broken down into other substances?
element

What is the term for a cross in which the inheritance of two characteristics are tracked at the same time?
dihybrid cross

Through what system of the body do hormones generally travel?
circulatory system

What sort of digestion do animals engage in?
internal

What is the most abundant biochemical compound?
cellulose

When organisms penetrate a rock, they accelerate breakdown by chemical means and what other means?
mechanical

What determines velocity?
distance over time in a given direction

What term is used to describe a simple diagram that shows one way energy flows through an ecosystem?
food chain

How can nuclear fusion in stars be simulated?
particle accelerators

What type of tissue transmits nerve impulses throughout the body?
nervous

Animals produce most of what chemicals, which are needed to synthesize the fatty acids they need?
enzymes

How do parathyroid hormones react as a body ages?
increase with age

What describe the fraction or percentage of a mixture that is made up of a particular substance.
mole fractions

What are the most numerous organisms in the world?
insects

What helps push the fetus from the uterus during birth?
contractions

Telescopes use which kind of lenses to enlarge images?
convex

How does uric acid react to water?
does not dissolve

Which kingdom are mosses and trees included in?
plant

What is the developing human organism referred to as from the end of the eighth week until birth?
fetus

In an acidic medium, add which ions to balance?
hydrogen

Which type of plankton make food via photosynthesis?
phytoplankton

What is capable of altering the rate of time passing?
strong gravitational fields

Damages and deaths are directly affected by what in an earthquake?
construction

What is the the basic si unit for mass?
kilogram (kg)

What are objects that are launched into the air called?
projectiles

What are hydrocarbons with double bonds called?
alkenes

What is the liquid component in blood?
plasma

Functional groups are groups of atoms that occur within molecules and confer specific chemical properties to those molecules. they are found along the “carbon backbone” of what?
macromolecules

Predators can replace what tool in agriculture.
pesticides

What is a mixture of eroded rock, minerals, partly decomposed organic matter, and other materials called?
soil

All cells need what for energy?
glucose

In an experiment, what is the affected variable called?
dependent variable

Does the stream-lined body featured on most fish increase or decrease water resistance?
decrease

What is the role of the sodium ion in the neutralization reaction of sodium flouride?
spectator ion

What is the name of the line used in topographic maps that shows different elevations?
a contour line

Sporangia produce spores that develop into tiny, heart-shaped what?
gametophytes

A long chain of mountains that rises up high above the deep seafloor is called?
mid-ocean ridges

When bacteria are destroyed by leukocytes, what are released into the blood?
pyrogens

Hierarchical classification can reflect the branching patterns of phylogenetic?
trees

Unstable isotopes give off particles and energy as what?
radioactivity

What structure is an organelle that contains enzymes that break down and digest unneeded cellular components?
lysosome

What is the unit used to measure voltage?
volts

What type of gases are used for balloons, light bulbs and lighted signs?
noble

Some living things on the ocean floor are sources of what human necessity?
medicines

Many protists form what kind of beneficial association with other species?
symbiotic

When two of these meet, the result is often a storm?
air masses

What causes food to move through the esophagus?
peristalsis

What do we call the solid form of hydrocarbons?
coal

What is needed to create muscles, regulate chemical reactions, and transport oxygen?
proteins

What does the vertebral column , or backbone, protect?
spinal cord

X rays and what other type of electromagnetic wave has the shortest wavelengths and the highest frequencies?
gamma rays

The anterior pituitary produces seven different what, each with a special function?
hormones

What is the term for the measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles in matter?
temperature

Pepsin and trypsin are examples of enzymes involved in what bodily process?
digestion

What is the only metalloid in group 13?
boron

How is a mammal developed if not inside of a placenta or a pouch?
hatched from eggs

Slime molds have several morphological similarities to fungi, including spore-generation, that are thought to be the result of convergent what?
evolution

What do willow trees produce to kill bacteria?
salicylic acid

The ph scale is a scale used to express the concentration of hydrogen ions in solution. a neutral solution, neither acidic nor basic, has a ph of what?
7

What is the term for something left behind by once-living organisms?
fossils

What connects the peripheral nervous system to the central nervous system?
nerves

In which supergroup are red algae and green algae included?
archaeplastida

If a machine only changes the direction of a force without changing the ratio of the output/input forces, then what is its associated mechanical advantage?
1

What is an advantage of brightly colored fruits?
attract animals to disperse their seeds

What is the apt term for the very slow movement of rock and soil down a hillside?
creep

The zeros at the end of a number are known as what?
trailing zeros

Does water get colder or warmer the deeper you go?
colder

Many transition metals and their compounds are used as what?
catalysts

What do willow trees produce to kill bacteria?
salicylic acid

What do decomposers release once they have broken down the dead organisms?
inorganic molecules

Often determining the strength or intensity of a wave, this term is the distance from the equilibrium point of motion to either its lowest or highest point?
amplitude

Which type of muscle fiber can sustain long contractions?
slow fibers

We would genetically be all the same if genes did not have different what?
alleles

Thylakoid membranes contain molecules of what green pigment used in photosynthesis?
chlorophyll

What is the name for a way of learning that involves reward or punishment?
conditioning

What scale measures the total energy released by an earthquake?
moment magnitude scale

All enzymes have an optimal temperature and what?
ph

When do homologous chromosomes form pairs?
meiosis

What forms when the metal sodium gives up an electron to the nonmetal chlorine?
an ionic bond

What type of gas is produced by alcoholic fermentation of the glucose in corn or other plants?
ethanol

What type of transport is vesicle transport considered to be?
active transport

Strong bands of dense, regular connective tissue that connect muscles to bones are called what?
tendons

Homes and transportation use what percent of all energy in the u.s.?
half (fifty)

What falls roughly in the middle of the electromagnetic spectrum, having shorter wavelengths and higher frequencies than microwaves, but not as short and high as x rays?
light

What are models good for?
they give us an idea of what the real thing is like

Explanations of some aspect of the natural world based on repeated observations are termed what?
scientific theories

What is found in abundance in the polar ice caps and under the surface of mars?
water

What do nerve impulses travel along?
axons

Cyanobacteria are bluish green in color because they contain what?
chlorophyll

How many miles is the distance between the earth and sun?
93

What is the dominant form of plant life in most terrestrial ecosystems, comprising about 90 percent of all plant species?
angiosperms

What is the largest mammal on earth?
blue whale

What are elements that generally do not conduct electricity?
nonmetals

Superconductors expel a magnetic field from their interior. what is this phenomenon known as?
meissner effect

Continually increasing the pressure on the liquid will eventually cause the substance to do what?
solidify

Hypersensitivity may refer to a maladaptive response of what system toward a harmless foreign substance?
immune

Similarity that results from common ancestry is known as what?
homology

We all start as a single cell and soon grow into what?
embryo

Which acid contains only one ionizable hydrogen?
monoprotic acid

The epidermis is made of which closely packed cells?
epithelial cells

What is a double membrane of the nucleus that encloses the genetic material?
nuclear enevelope

What effect does changing temperature have on a system at equilibrium?
stress

What type of cancer can the use of tanning beds lead to?
skin cancer

Organisms tend to be larger in size at higher what levels?
trophic

A major step in animal evolution was the evolution of what rigid rod that runs the length of the body?
notochord

What is the name of the process that refers to the balance or equilibrium within the cell or a body?
homeostasis

What is the clear, protective covering on the outside of the eye?
cornea

Deeper layers of rock must be older than layers closer to the surface, this is the law of what?
superposition

Dentists occasionally use metallic mixtures called amalgams for what?
fillings

Which infection turns ant's abdomen red and fruit-like and an easy prey for birds?
neotropicum

What do mitochondrions have an inner and outer version of?
membrane

Resistance to pesticides in a population of insects is an example of what?
microevolution

What expresses the mass of substance in terms of the volume occupied by the substance?
density

What organ is the hypothalamus a part of?
brain

Urea, ammonia and uric acid are types of what waste, excreted in different forms by different species?
nitrogenous waste

Besides tasting food, what organ is necessary for mastication, deglutition (swallowing), and speech?
tongue

What is transmitted by moving electrons in an electric current?
electrical energy

What happens if a molecule forms strong bonds to the catalyst?
catalyst gets poisoned

In general, kinetic energy is the form of energy powering any type of matter in motion, while the energy of position is called what?
potential energy

What event occurs between the two solstices?
equinox

Alveoli can be found in which organ in the human body?
lungs

About one-fourth of the blood pumped with each heartbeat enters arteries serving what organs of digestion?
intestines

The paired bones of the skull are the palatine, zygomatic, nasal, lacrimal, inferior nasal conchae bones, and what else?
maxilla

Each muscle fiber contains hundreds of organelles called what?
myofibrils

The common cold and flu are examples of human diseases caused by what tiny particles?
viruses

What are the two layers of the skin?
epidermis and dermis

Light can be used to eject what from a solid material?
electrons

What element is a biochemical compound based on?
carbon

The amniotic sac is attached to what?
placenta

Which type of respiration helps organisms generate quick bursts of speed, as opposed to long steady movement?
anaerobic respiration

When matter reacts, there can be what that comes from nowhere and is unaccounted for?
mass

What is located at about 80 degrees north latitude?
the north pole

What is a byproduct from the combustion of fossil fuels like coal and gasoline?
nitrogen dioxide

What can damage animal tissues?
extreme pressure or temperature

Along with other functions, what do carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids provide for the body?
energy

What system of the body uses amylase and pepsin in its functioning?
digestive system

What are genes located on the sex chromosomes called?
sex-linked genes

The posterior pituitary releases which hormone, which stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth?
oxytocin

What consists mainly of parenchymal cells with chloroplasts?
mesophyll

What is the movement of animals from one place to another?
migration

Twin studies have been instrumental in demonstrating what type of component in autism?
environmental

What is a measure of the size of sound waves?
amplitude

Covalent compounds form individual molecules rather than what?
crystals

Winds are caused by differences in what?
air pressure

What is generated when a heart ventricle contracts?
blood pressure

What area beneath the earth's surface do magma collects?
magma chambers

What develop inside chambers called ovaries, which originate within flowers and mature into fruits?
angiosperm seeds

What kind of lakes form when volcanic eruptions create holes that fill with water?
crater lakes

The size of the solute particles determines the rate of what?
dissolving

The vas deferens and ejaculatory ducts are part of what system?
male reproductive system

What part of an egg contains the genetic material ?
the nucleus

Bees and other wild animals perform what function on flowering plants, making them vital for crop reproduction?
pollenation

What does the sebaceous gland secrete which waterproofs the skin and hair?
sebum

What water is about 3.5% salt?
seawater

Catabolic and anabolic hormones in the body help regulate these?
metabolic processes

Food chains and what describe the transfer of energy within an ecosystem, from one organism to another?
food webs

The type of eruption a volcano has depends on the type of what in its chamber?
magma

What organ has four ventricles, all of which developed from the original hollow space within the neural tube?
brain

The cell theory and the theory of evolution by natural selection are basic to all fields in what branch of science?
life science

How many types of antigens can an antibody match?
one

What do drugs that alleviate symptoms of schizophrenia block?
dopamine receptors

What destroys the filtered pathogens?
lymphocytes

A device that produces a very focused beam of visible light of just one wavelength and color is called?
laser

The second step in eukaryotic cell division is division of which part of the cell?
nucleus

Approximately how many galaxies are there in the universe?
about a hundred billion

What theory of evolution is charles darwin most known for?
natural selection

What organ system is different in men and women?
reproductive organs

Why do effusive eruptions rarely kill anyone?
they move slowly

What are hot fragments of rock called?
pyroclasts

Unevenness or asymmetry in the focus of the eye describes what visual defect?
astigmatism

The addition of electron gives the halide ions the same electron configuration as what gas?
a noble gas

Partially decayed remains of plants and animals form the organic portion of what?
soil

Where is the most significant connection between the cerebellum and the rest of the brain?
at the pons

What do you call the daily changes in the level of ocean water?
tides

What are the specialized building blocks of your body?
cells

What do plants make to store extra glucose?
starches

Sand dunes migrate when sand is blown up a slope and this force pulls it down the other side?
gravity

Inside each lymph node is a honeycomb of connective tissue with spaces filled by what?
white blood cells

What "apparatus" is responsible for sorting, modifying, and shipping off the products that come from the rough endoplasmic reticulum?
golgi apparatus

When two haploid gametes unite during fertilization they form what?
a diploid cell

What kind of phenotype results in a case of incomplete dominance?
intermediate phenotype

Chloroplasts, chromoplasts, and leucoplasts are all plastids, organelles found in what kind of cells?
plant cells

What is the attraction of a particular atom for the electrons of a covalent bond called?
electronegativity

How many continents do birds breed on?
7

Dna consists of how many long chains of nucleotides?
two

What is the transition from liquid to gas is called?
boiling

What is inside the plasma membrane of a prokaryotic cell?
cytoplasm

When the helium is gone, the stars become what?
white dwarfs

What is the change of state from a solid to a gas without passing through the liquid state?
sublimation

What type of cells are gametes?
reproductive

What is the touch response in plants called?
thigmotropism

Humans have an estimated 20,000 to 22,000 of what units of heredity?
genes

What is defined as the amount of force acting on a given area?
pressure

What system consists of glands that secrete hormones into the bloodstream?
the endocrine system

Where are the oceans most polluted?
along coasts

What organelles are known as the energy "powerhouses" of the cells?
mitochondria

What is the effect on pressure when the area of applied force is very concentrated?
pressure increases

What two elements primarily make up the sun?
hydrogen and helium

Adipose is a connective tissue made up of cells called what?
adipocytes

Where are about 75% of the tar sands in the world located?
venezuela and alberta, canada

Does pressure increase or decrease when gas particles heat up?
increase

What are the two most common vision problems?
nearsightedness and farsightedness

What is the pair of bean-shaped organs that filters blood and produces urine?
kidneys

Met, asn, trp, and gln connect together like beads on a necklace and are an example of what type of acids?
amino acids

What is a carbon-based compound that is found in living things called?
biochemical compound

What do you call a mirror shaped like the inside of a bowl?
concave

Ions that contain fewer electrons than protons have a net positive charge and are called what?
cations

What factors consist of parts of the environment that are or were alive, and their remains?
biotic factors

What is another name for a reasonable explanation for something that might be formed near the beginning of a scientific inquiry into a problem?
hypothesis

What is the logarithmic scale that measures the largest jolt of energy released by an earthquake called?
richter scale

Polarization occurs between a charged and what other object?
neutral

Glucose, fructose, and other sugars that have six carbons are called what?
hexoses

What is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land?
runoff

What is the method that is a plan for asking questions and testing possible answers called?
scientific investigation

What branch of physics deals with the smallest units of elements and compounds?
atomic

What kinds of acids are proteins made out of?
amino acids

Whisk ferns have yellow sporangia and no what?
leaves

Do tropical regions have very high or very low rates of immigration?
very high

What type of experiment involves two identical experiments carried out side-by-side, with and without an independent variable?
controlled experiment

How does the core of the sun radiate energy?
nuclear fusion

What is the concentration of gas molecules in the mesosphere?
very low density

What type of energy causes erosion at the shore?
wave

Long distance runners try to maintain constant velocity with very little acceleration or deceleration to conserve what?
energy

What is the smallest particle of an element that still has the element’s properties?
an atom

A biofilm is a colony of what that is stuck to a surface such as a rock or a host’s tissues?
prokaryotes

The stem of a horsetail is characterized by the presence of joints, or nodes: hence the name arthrophyta, which means this?
jointed plant

What do power plants burn to generate electricity?
fossil fuels

What organ lets us understand what we see, hear, or sense in other ways, and allows us to use language, learn, think, and remember?
brain

What is the more common term for ethanoic acid, the active substance in vinegar?
acetic acid

What type of pollution results from the contaminants that enter a waterway or water body through a single site?
point source pollution

What are the "chemical messenger" molecules used by the endocrine system?
hormones

Many innovative farming methods can prevent what type of erosion, which is especially important in agriculture?
soil erosion

As the atoms approach one another, their electron clouds gradually begin to do what?
overlap

What force holds together both types of star clusters?
gravity

What are the rod-like structures made of short microtubules that play an important part in cellular division?
centrioles

Vertebrates with four limbs are also called what?
tetrapods

What is the name of the disorder of the arteries in which cholesterol and other materials are deposited on the interior of the arterial wall?
atherosclerosis

What is defined as a close relationship between organisms of different species in which at least one of the organisms benefits?
symbiosis

What do you call the force identified by a north and south pole?
magnetism

The voltage of a voltaic cell can be determined by the reduction potentials of what?
half reactions

What type of fatty acids have bent chains?
unsaturated fatty acids

All seed plants and a few seedless vascular plants are what?
heterosporous

The three segments of arthropods are the head, thorax and what?
abdomen

A notochord has in common with what vertbrate structure?
spinal cord

Most members of what mammalian order possess opposable thumbs?
primates

What refers to a group of individual organisms of the same species that live closely together?
a colony

The rise in greenhouse gases has what effect on the temperature of earth?
it increases

What two types of atoms bond to form sulfate minerals?
oxygen and sulfur

Where does groundwater primarily come from?
precipitation

What determines sex in animals?
sex chromosomes

The joints of the carpal bones in the wrist are examples of what type of joints?
planar joints

If a unit is named after a person it needs to be?
capitalized

What is the name for the inner lining of the uterus?
the endometrium

What is it called when currents keep reversing direction?
alternating current

What is the name given to anything that has mass and takes up space?
matter

What is the upper most level of earth's layers called?
crust

What are secreted into the gi tract by organs of the gi tract or from a nearby gland named the pancreas?
digestive enzymes

In what organ does pepsin help break down proteins?
stomach

What begins when a neuron receives a chemical stimulus?
a nerve impulse

Pink snapdragons are an example of what?
incomplete dominance

Air quality is a measure of what in the air?
pollutants

What do solar cells convert the energy in sunlight into?
electrical energy

Both endotherms and ectotherms control what through behavioral responses to changes in the environment?
body temperature

What occurs when the bronchioles swell and the muscles around the bronchioles contract?
asthma

What giant planet is far away from and much less dense than earth?
jupiter

Bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa are examples of what, the term for a disease-causing microorganism?
pathogen

Newton’s third law of motion describes what property of forces that means balance?
symmetry

Translation is the second part of the central dogma of what?
molecular biology

What helps us see rainbows in the sky?
visible light

How the individuals in a population are spread throughout their habitat is referred to as what?
population distribution

The passenger pigeon, the dodo bird, and the woolly mammoth represent individual cases of what fate?
extinction

Both fats and oils are made up of long chains of carbon atoms that are bonded together. what are these chains called?
fatty acids

What adds phosphate groups to receptor proteins at the surface of the cell?
receptor kinases

Cold fronts in winter may bring what type of storm?
snow storm

What is added to alcohol and used as an antiseptic?
iodine

Excretion of ions occurs mainly through what organ?
kidneys

Acids can also react with metals, and when they do they produce what?
hydrogen gas

Convection is the transfer of what type of energy by particles moving through a fluid?
thermal

Foresters commonly inoculate pine seedlings with a type of what to promote growth?
fungi

What are animal fats and oils such as olive and vegetable oil classified as?
lipids

What type of alloys are used in musical instruments?
brass

Osteoclasts and osteoblasts play key roles in repair of what?
bone

What is the general shape of centrioles?
rod

Why does water infiltrate the ground?
because soil and rocks are porous

What is the upward force exerted by fluids when any object, such as a boat, is placed in it?
bouyant force

What do dendrites receive signals from?
neurons

What is the term for the exchange of genetic material between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes?
crossing-over

What must be overcome to change the motion of an object?
inertia

Which action of the stomach helps chemical digestion by gastric juice?
churning action

What two lenses comprise a compound microscope?
objective and eyepiece

Physical and chemical differences help ecologists distinguish between freshwater and marine types of what?
biomes

What are the organic compounds that the body needs in small amounts to function properly; humans need 13 different ones?
vitamins

To undo the tarnish on copper pennies, you can place them in what liquid?
vinegar

What kind of bonding between alcohol molecules means that more energy is required to convert the liquid to vapor, and boiling points are therefore high?
stronger hydrogen bonding

During summer in the northern hemisphere, the north pole is tilted toward what?
sun

Also called lodestone, the mineral magnetite is the most powerful what?
natural permanent magnet

How many valves are in the heart?
four

Momentum is directly related to both mass and?
velocity

Bones are made up of different types of what?
tissue

What do metals typically lose to achieve stability?
electrons

What happens when a sperm and an egg cell combine?
fertilization

What is the ability to change or move matter?
energy

How many weeks are in the life cycle of ladybugs
four to six

What is the respiratory pigment of almost every vertebrate?
hemoglobin

Objects moving at different speeds, in different directions have different what?
velocities

What type of compounds make up the cells and tissues of organisms?
biochemical compounds

Meiosis and what process are both preceded by one round of dna replication; however, they differ in producing haploid or diploid daughter cells?
mitosis

In their pure form, all elements have an oxidation number of what?
zero

What is a close relationship between two species in which at least one species benefits called?
symbiosis

Multiple sclerosis, huntington’s disease, parkinson’s disease, and alzheimer’s disease are example of diseases of which body system?
nervous system

What includes the living organisms in an area and the non-living aspects of the environment?
ecosystem

Bacteria may become untreatable if they develop what in response to multiple antibiotics?
resistance

What grows through blue cheese that gives it the distinctive appearance and flavor?
fungus

The two main types of phagocytic cells in the mammalian body are neutrophils and what other?
macrophages

What is aggravated by practices such as logging, mining, construction, and paving surfaces?
soil erosion

What type of hydrocarbon is coal?
solid

What chemicals in the liver support glucose homeostasis?
glucagon and insulin

When resources become limiting, populations follow a logistic growth curve in which the size will level off at a point called what?
carrying capacity

Along with climate, this also influences the type of vegetation that can grow in the region?
soil type

What is defined as anything that takes up space and has mass?
matter

What is the name of the simplest carbon molecule?
methane

Hyperparathyroidism results from an overproduction of what?
parathyroid hormone

What is formed when different gases are confined to the same container?
homogeneous mixture

What property of fluids causes something to stay on or near the surface of water?
buoyancy

What are the tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place?
alveoli

What is the stage between a zygote and polyp?
larva

What is the term for  a particle outside the nucleus of an atom that has a negative electric charge?
electron

Scientists goal is develop nuclear fusion power plants, where the energy from fusion of hydrogen nuclei can be converted to what?
electricity

In which state of matter are particles completely separate from one another?
gaseous state

Van der waals forces are weak interactions between molecules that involve what?
dipoles

What part of the body does emphysema affect?
lungs

What number is the sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom?
mass number

What kind of tool, often based on mathematical equations or computer simulations, helps us understand complex systems?
models

An ecosystem consists of all the living things and what?
nonliving environment

Mesophyll consists mainly of parenchyma cells specialized for what?
photosynthesis

Antibiotic drugs are usually effective in treating what kind of infections?
bacterial

What is earth’s geographic north pole also called?
true north

What are the nonliving aspects of the environment called?
abiotic factors

Chemical reactions follow the laws of what?
thermodynamics

What do you call a mixture of two or more substances in which dissolved particles are distributed evenly throughout?
solution

What is the water that falls from the sky called?
precipitation

What returns blood from capillaries to an atrium?
veins

Hemolymph bathes organs directly in arthropods and most molluscs, due to an open type of what system?
circulatory

According to the table, aluminum has an atomic number of 13. therefore, every aluminum atom has 13 protons in its what?
nucleus

Anemia, leukemia, hemophilia, and sickle-cell disease are examples of conditions that primarily affect what?
blood

What kind of variation does a rate measure?
property to time

What is the name of the process that changes some chemical substances into others?
chemical reaction

What is the term for the gases that surround a planet?
the atmosphere

Pressure and vibration are examples of what type of stimuli?
physical

In the chest, what divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left bronchi?
trachea

When does an oocyte complete meiosis?
after sperm penetration

The electroplating process transfers metal from the anode to which part of the cell?
cathode

Compression, tension and shear refer to what type of force that can cause rock to change?
stress

Unlike the biological species concept, the ecological species concept can accommodate asexual as well as ________ species.
sexual

A basic function of cells includes obtaining what from glucose?
energy

What is the term for a test to see if a scientific explanation is right or wrong?
experiment

When a solvent with a gas dissolved in it is heated, the kinetic energy of both the solvent and solute _________?
increases

How does the bacteria look when seen with the naked eye?
slimy smear

What is a device used to measure temperature changes during chemical processes called?
calorimeter

Ebola is an example of a disease spread by what kind of infectious agent?
virus

The tiny hair present on mucus membranes is known as?
cilia

What elements do lipids primarily consist of?
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen

Polychaetes make up a large and diverse group. which category do the majority of these worms fall into?
marine

What is the main makeup of the cell membrane?
phospholipids

When a host attacks a parasitic bacteria, the bacteria release what to surround the cell wall?
layer of slime

Solutions can also become supersaturated , where the amount of solute dissolved exceeds what?
its solubility

What is the biggest risk associated with using nuclear energy?
radiation

What property is the result of the force of gravity being opposed by the normal force?
weight

What are the cliffs called which are created when waves erode a rocky shoreline, leaving a vertical wall of exposed rock layers?
wave-cut

When boron10 absorbs a neutron, what does it emit?
particle

What is the most common life form in the ocean?
plankton

What circulates with the blood or hemolymph and are often contained within specialized cells
respiratory pigments

What are the two possible reduction products for brf3?
brf and br2

Normal blood is comprised of nearly half erythrocytes, which is another word for what cells?
red blood cells

What type of intense storm is a system of winds that rotate around a low pressure center, resulting in swirling air that rises and cools to create clouds and precipitation?
cyclone

Blood flows into the kidney through which artery?
renal artery

Growth and development in humans is most rapid during what two stages?
infancy and adolescence

What are used to write nuclear equations for radioactive decay?
nuclear symbols

The pull of gravity is expressed as a force of what?
newtons

What type of physics explains the behavior of visible light and electromagnetic waves?
optics

The duodenum has a major role in regulating what digestive organ and its emptying?
stomach

What are misfolded versions of normal brain proteins?
prions

By impacting plant species and the animals they support, destruction of habitat threatens what event?
extinction

What division of the nervous system controls involuntary activities that are not emergencies, such as the digestive organs breaking down food?
parasympathetic division

What occurs when a cold air mass runs into a warm air mass?
a cold front

What are the tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place?
alveoli

What is the term for plants that lack vascular tissues, roots, leaves, seeds, and flowers?
bryophytes

Why are continents unable to be pushed down into the mantle by plate boundaries?
buoyancy

What is it called when a new species arises without geographic separation?
sympatric speciation

In an exothermic reaction, what, specifically, is released?
heat

What term describes diseases caused by abnormal cells in the body dividing uncontrollably?
cancer

What is the molecule, dipeptide formed together by?
amino acids

Did the the open circulatory systems of molluscs and arthropods arise dependently or independently of each other?
independently

What kind of weathering is abrasion?
mechanical

What are composed of alternating positive and negative ions?
ionic crystals

What is the term for a small organelle where proteins are made?
ribosome

What occurs when the immune system attacks harmless substances that enter the body from the outside?
allergies

What is composed of very long strands of glucose monomers, is largely indigestible and comprises the cell walls of plants?
cellulose

Where are the terrestrial planets located, in relation to the sun?
closest

What are the insects that suck up the sap from plants?
aphids and leafhoppers

The energy for an ecosystem can come from sunlight or _________?
chemical compounds

Phagocytosis, pinocytosis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis are the three types of what?
endocytosis

What type of machines generally have lower efficiency but greater mechanical advantage?
compound machines

What is the name of the layer above the mesosphere?
thermosphere

What layer of earth contains abundant oxygen, which can combine with other elements to create oxide minerals?
the crust

Animals that are endotherms or ectotherms are distinguished by the ability to maintain a constant what?
body temperature

What form of energy is light?
electromagnetic

What is a common chemical substance on planet earth?
water

Blood calcium levels are tightly regulated by the what system?
endocrine

This bodily defense function attacks pathogens and includes inflammatory response and phagocytosis?
second line of defense

Lodgepole cones remain closed until exposed to what?
extreme heat

What is the change of state from a gas to a liquid?
condensation

The steropodon may have been an ancestor of which animal?
platypus

Closely associated with "work", what is characterized by its many forms and the fact that it is conserved?
energy

What is the time it takes for radioactive substance to decay?
half-life

What type of biomes are found in the salt water of the ocean?
marine

What is formed when an enzyme binds its substrate?
enzyme - substrate complex

What type of rock is a sandstone?
sedimentary rocks

Which acids provide the molecular blueprints for all proteins produced in living systems?
nucleic acids

Cephalopods have three hearts that pump blood of what color?
blue

Influenza is a type of what, where glycoproteins attach to a host epithelial cell?
viral disease

What is the smallest aromatic hydrocarbon?
benzene

A hypothesis is scientific only if it can be tested by what?
making observations

Aging occurs as cells lose their ability to do what?
divide

The tyndall effect refers to the scattering of what by colloidal particles?
visible light

Acids are associated with a low number on which scale?
ph

Said to go hand-in-hand with science, what evolves as new materials, designs, and processes are invented?
technology

What are the poles labeled?
north and south

What is considered to be the "fundamental unit" of life?
cell

What two states of matter are included in the category "fluids"?
liquids and gases

When matter changes into an entirely different substance with different chemical properties, what has occurred?
chemical change

Phospholipids are unable to mix with what?
water

What are molecules that the immune system recognize as foreign to the body?
antigens

The end result of diffusion is an equal concentration, or equilibrium , of molecules on both sides of what?
the membrane

What paired organs that are part of the urinary system play the prime role in excretion?
kidneys

The fungus benefits from the constant supply of food produced by what?
the photosynthesizer

Gases can be classifed as real or what?
ideal

What is a mutation?
change in the nucleotide sequence of dna

What are biological catalysts that speeds up biochemical reactions?
enzymes

What type of reaction is a transfer of a proton from one molecule or ion to another?
acid-base

What part of the plant, in general, is responsible for transport and storage of water and minerals?
stems

One gram of carbohydrates provides how many calories of energy?
four

Mushrooms and other fungi obtain energy from what?
other organisms

How are protozoa that cause giardiasis spread?
food and water

What can prevent the passage of molecules and ions between cells, such as in the blood-brain barrier?
tight junctions

Give an example of air pollution while painting indoors.
paint fumes

What plays a variety of important roles in biochemical systems?
protein

What type of plants grow on other plants?
epiphytes

What provides a protective covering for the body and helps maintain homeostasis?
integumentary system

Uranium is an important part of the process used to harness which type of power?
nuclear

Budding and fission in annelids are examples of what type of reproduction?
asexual

What is the process by which plants make their own food?
photosynthesis

In what part of the carbon cycle does carbon move between living things and the air?
biotic cycle

Herbivores and the bacteria that live in their intestines demonstrate a two-way beneficial relationship called what?
mutualism

What joins within each testis to form the epididymis?
seminiferous tubules

How many layers of phospholipids does the cell membrane contain?
two

What process within cells makes sure that every gamete receives a copy of every chromosome?
meiosis

Do amphibians and reptiles maintain a constant body temperature?
no, they have about the same body temperature as their surroundings

Most vascular plants are seed plants, also known as?
spermatophytes

Centrifuges use what to perform their task?
inertia

What are the two unique features of mollusks?
mantle and radula

Name the two types of water turtles live in.
ocean water and fresh water

What structures are located on roof of the nasopharynx and on each side of the pharynx?
tonsils

What colorful arc-shaped atmospheric phenomena are produced by a combination of refraction and reflection?
rainbows

Rabies transmission occurs when saliva from an infected mammal enters a wound. the virus travels through neurons in the peripheral nervous system to the central nervous system where it impairs this?
brain function

Newton realized that the nature of gravity on earth that pulls an apple to the ground could explain the motion of these?
moon and planets

Where do most of the steps of cellular respiration take place?
mitochondria

Which metal is not solid at room temperature?
mercury

Induced mutations are caused by environmental factors. what term is used to describe a mutation that has no environmental cause?
spontaneous mutation

What part of the cell does cellular respiration occur?
mitochondria

How is the chance of survival affected when animals lack parental care?
decreased

Elements with magic numbers of what tend to have more stable isotopes?
protons

What is the term for the steep sloped side of a sand dune?
slip face

Pulleys are generally used to do what with objects?
lift

What term describes how close estimates are to one another?
precision

What are membrane-bound organelles that can have secretory, excretory, and storage functions?
vacuoles

The structural classification of joints divides them into bony, fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial joints. the bones of fibrous joints are held together by fibrous connective tissue; the three types of fibrous joints are sutures, syndesomes, and what?
gomphoses

A catalyst can increase the rate of what, in general?
chemical reaction

Which crust lies deep inside the ocean?
oldest

What is the most significant cause of respiratory disease as well as cardiovascular disease and cancer?
smoking

What type of light can you feel as heat but not see and has the longest wavelengths and lowest frequencies?
infrared light

Ionic, molecular, covalent, and metallic are major types of what state of matter?
solids

What forces keep the moon orbiting the earth?
gravitational

Snow and ice may also undergo which process where there is intense sunlight, very cold temperatures, and dry winds?
sublimation

Electromagnets can be controlled by controlling what type of current?
electric

The rate of evolution is influenced by the rate of changes to what?
the environment

What do you call a device that produces a very focused beam of visible light of just one wavelength and color?
laser

Bubbles in bread dough are created by what gas produced during alcoholic fermentation?
carbon dioxide

What is the capacity to cause change?
energy

Ocean currents transfer heat from the equator towards what locations?
poles

In sexual reproduction, two of what unite to produce an offspring?
gametes

What are the ends of long bones called?
epiphysis

Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through what?
fluid

What happens when waves reach the shore?
topple and break

What is an involuntary muscle contraction that moves rapidly along an organ like a wave called?
peristalsis

What is the purpose of water molds in fresh water environments?
decomposition

What corrosive substances capable of dissolving many metals can cause contamination if spilled?
acids

What is always conserved in chemical reactions?
mass

A polyatomic ion is an ion composed of more than one what?
atom

Mutualism is an interaction between individuals of two different species that has what effect on both of them?
beneficial

What are the structural and functional units of the nervous system, which transmit nerve impulses to other cells?
neurons

If hot water becomes trapped, pressure may build up. when the water breaks free, it creates what?
geyser

What electrical force is responsible for fission?
repulsion

Which law states that a pair of alleles is separated, or segregated, during the formation of gametes?
law of segregation

Sounds or pictures can be encoded in pulses of what, which are then sent through an optical fiber?
laser light

What substance are physical objects are made of?
matter

Why do mangrove trees rise high above the water? which characteristic help them to do so?
stilt like roots

What fertilizes an egg during sexual reproduction?
sperm

How does the fungus benefit from the photosynthesizer?
supply of food

What is the name for unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one double bond?
alkenes

What is the term for  a loop in which a product feeds back to control its own production?
feedback mechanism

During what period on earth was coal formed?
the carboniferous period

What is the term for the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum?
light

Which vertebrates were the first with four limbs?
amphibians (or tetrapods)

How do plants support themselves above the ground to get light and oxygen?
stiff stems

What process starts with glucose and ends with two pyruvate molecules, a total of four atp molecules and two molecules of nadh?
glycolysis

What paired organs help regulate blood pressure through sodium ion and water retention and loss?
kidneys

What is the age-related disorder that causes the gradual loss of bone density and strength?
osteoporosis

What are microfilaments made out of?
two actin chains

Which bones are the large, curved bones that form the lateral and anterior aspects of the pelvis?
hip

What bifurcates into the right and left bronchi in the lungs?
trachea

What is the spreading of white light into its full spectrum of wavelengths called?
dispersion

What type of fertilization usually occurs in aquatic environments where both eggs and sperm are released into the water?
external

What is the energy of motion called?
kinetic energy

Overharvesting is especially challenging for species with what type of habitat?
restricted

What is a representation of the valence electrons of an atom that uses dots around the symbol of the element?
lewis structure

Massive quanta, like electrons, also act like macroscopic particles—something we expect, because they are the smallest what?
units of matter

The simplest example of what type of 'organ system' is the gastrovascular cavity found in organisms with only one opening for the process?
digestive

Photographs of the heat emitted by an object are called what?
thermal images

Graphite is a form of elemental carbon what is another form?
diamond

If everything else stays the same in a system with a gas in it, and the gas gets warmer, what will happen to its pressure, generally?
it increases

What term means a failure, insufficiency, or delay in the response of the immune system, which may be acquired or inherited?
immunodeficiency

The mature pollen grain is composed of two cells: the pollen tube cell and which other cell?
generative cell

The neck of the uterus, called the cervix, opens into what?
vagina

Where does the small intestine begin?
stomach

What type of shape does a pelvic inlet have?
oval shape

Which stage of life is typically easier for learning multiple languages?
childhood

What is released from the body during ejaculation?
sperm

An organism's unique role in the ecosystem is called its what?
niche

With the exception of water, what accounts for more mass than any other component of living organisms?
proteins

Atoms are combined, separated, or rearranged during what?
chemical reactions

How many electrons does lithium have?
three

What is considered the center of the solar system?
sun

What is the purpose of your body's first line of defense?
to keep out pathogens

What functions as a framework that reinforces the shape of the leaf?
the vascular structure

Like quarks, gluons may be confined to systems having a total color of what?
white

The ozone layer protects the earth from what?
uv radiation

What type of learning is based on past experience and reasoning?
insight

What type of energy from a warm cola results in melting when it is transferred to the much colder ice?
thermal energy

What is the term for a connection between a neuron and its target cell?
synapse

What does the slope of a position-time graph represent?
velocity

What effect causes an object to appear to have a change of motion?
coriolis effect

A carcinogen is nything in the environment that can cause what disease?
cancer

What does the blue color of the pulmonary arteries reflect?
they are deoxygenated

The trade winds are nearest what?
equator

Digestion of polysaccharides and disaccharides in the small intestine produces glucose and other?
monosaccharides

What is the term for the smallest blood vessels?
capillaries

In what type of body of water is most of the earth's water located?
oceans

What is one problem with current methods of aluminum production?
environmental contaminants

What makes the earth habitable for humans?
abundance of water

Which kind of flowers carry both male and female floral organs?
perfect flowers

Historically, certain bacteriophages have also been used as cloning vectors for making what?
genomic libraries

An allele is an alternative form of what structure?
gene

All photosynthetic organisms contain a pigment called what?
chlorophyll

Mammals may either be herbivores, omnivores or what else?
herbivores

What phenomenon sometimes causes harmful alleles to become fixed?
genetic drift

How do you determine the atomic weight of an element?
add up protons and neutrons

Sodium and chlorine combine to make what?
salt

What can bacterial stis be cured with?
antibiotics

What do bees do for flowering plants?
pollinate

Where do streams often start?
mountains

Deletions remove one or more what from the dna?
nucleotides

For geneticists, the findings of what massive undertaking are significant in determining disease-causing alleles?
human genome project

Does deforestation increase or decrease carbon dioxide levels around the world?
increase

Which material used in oxyacetylene torches helps cut and weld metals?
acetylene

Peroxisomes perform a couple of different functions, including lipid metabolism and chemical detoxification. in contrast to the digestive enzymes found in lysosomes, the enzymes within peroxisomes serve to transfer hydrogen atoms from various molecules to oxygen, producing what?
hydrogen peroxide

Ethylene, gibberellins, cytokinins, absciscic acid, and auxins are examples of what?
plant hormones

What are some uses of chlorine gas?
cleaning, disinfecting and in swimming pools

Designed to exchange materials, what spongy structure consists of membranes and blood vessels from both mother and embryo?
placenta

Even though tellurium does indeed have a greater average atomic mass than iodine, it is properly placed before iodine in the?
periodic table

In a fullerene, what atoms are bonded to three other atoms in a soccer ball pattern?
carbon

What do you call the light particles that travel through the radiative zone?
photons

What is a mixture of potassium nitrate, sulfur, and charcoal?
gunpowder

Opportunistic diseases are usually the direct cause of death of people with what disease?
aids

What is the name of an uncharged particle whose weight is nearly equal to that of a proton?
a neutron

The chemical symbol of which ion is written first in ionic compounds?
positive metal ion

What is the opposite of rarefaction zones, where air molecules in waves are loosely packed?
compression zones

What organs secrete hormones that help maintain homeostasis?
the kidneys

The nuclear envelope is a double-layered plasma membrane like the cell membrane, although without what?
membrane proteins

What is another name for a radioactive isotope?
radiostope

Dietary proteins are broken down into amino acids during what process?
digestion

Some gametophytes develop underground and form mycorrhizal associations with what?
fungi

What is the nervous tissue in the brain and in the rest of the nervous system made up of?
neurons

How do planets usually rotate to their orbital planes?
nearly perpendicular

What are algae that live in colonies of hundreds of cells called?
volvox

Irrigation can waste a lot of what natural resource?
water

What drives puberty in male humans?
testosterone

What is our largest source of energy?
coal

Helium-3 is produced by beta decay of a certain what?
nuclide

What do animals require to grow and develop?
food

What term is used to describe the process by which organisms give rise to offspring?
reproduction

What are the nonliving matter that living things need called?
nutrients

What term is used to express the measurement of how high land is above sea level?
elevation

A pulley is a simple machine that consists of a grooved wheel and?
a rope

What is another name for a broad explanation that is supported by a great deal of evidence?
theory

Vinegar is a solution of which acid?
acetic

Which system does the large and small intestine belong to?
digestive system

Particles of matter have the most definite shape in what material state?
solid

What body system allows humans to move?
muscular system

High decibel sounds can damage your?
ears

What are the dark areas that appear on the sun called?
sunspots

Fusion is another nuclear process that can be used to produce energy. in this process, smaller nuclei are combined to make larger nuclei, with an accompanying release of this?
energy

One common form of mate choice, called assortative mating, is an individual’s preference to mate with partners who are what?
similar to themselves

What powerful microscopes use a beam of subatomic particles instead of a beam of light?
electron microscopes

Which scientist built the first telescope?
galileo

What type of bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrates in soil?
nitrogen fixing bacteria

If no unbalanced force acts on an object the object remains at constant velocity or what?
at rest

What group of organisms was initially misclassified as plants because they also lack the ability to move, grow in soil, and have cell walls?
fungi

How does the epidermis renew its layer?
shedding dead cells

What is it called when crystals form from magma?
crystallization

What type of symmetry does an octopus have?
bilateral

What is necessary in a person who wishes to play wind instruments?
healthy lungs

What is the scientific term for climates with the least moisture?
arid

What's the term for a piece of an organism breaking off and forming a new organism?
fragmentation

What animal group can be found in every environment on earth, but primarily in the warm and moist tropics?
insect

Most people can survive only a few days without what essential substance?
water

The vegetal pole refers to the concentration of what toward one pole of an egg?
yolk

What machines have scientist built to smash particles that are smaller than atoms into each other head-on?
particle accelerators

What type of relationship occurs between organisms when one member benefits without affecting the other?
commensalism

The type of what dictates how far it can penetrate into matter, such as lead or human flesh?
radiation

What role do proteins play in a biological reaction?
act as catalysts

If you drive or take the bus to school or work, you are using a vehicle that probably burns gasoline, a material that burns fairly easily and provides energy to power the vehicle. recall that burning is a?
chemical change

Muscles are composed mostly of cells called what?
muscle fibers

Conifers are the most prevalent type of what plant group?
gymnosperms

What element enters the body when an organism breathes?
oxygen

Bonding in molecules with resonance forms is better described by which theory?
molecular orbital theory

In places like the grand canyon, hard rocks that are resistant to weathering form what, while softer rocks that weather more easily form slopes?
cliffs

When two skateboarders push against each other what happens?
they move apart

The three layers of protective coverings of the spinal cord is called what?
meninges

A measure of how close a series of measurements are to one another is what?
precision

Ionic compounds contain cations and anions rather than what?
discrete neutral molecules

Are giraffes herbivores or are they omnivores?
herbivores

Respectively, which parts of the circulatory system carry blood from the heart toward capillaries, and return blood to the heart from capillaries?
arteries and veins

It was not until the era of the ancient greeks that we have any record of how people tried to explain the chemical changes they observed and used. at that time, natural objects were thought to consist of only four basic elements: earth, air, fire, and this?
water

In science, what do we call a mathematical relationship that exists between observations under a given set of conditions?
law

What conducts nerve-like electrical signals that help integrate whole-plant function?
the ploem

Found in many products, such as petri dishes, agar is made from mucilagnious material in this?
seaweed

What is the process of capturing a substance or particle from outside the cell by engulfing it with the cell membrane?
endocytosis

What are the layered rocks that form when certain prokaryotes bind thin films of sediment together?
stomatolites

Where are the taste buds located in humans?
tongue

What describes the way light reflects off of the surface of the mineral?
luster

What tissue consists of cells that form the body’s structure?
connective

What forms at the boundary between two air masses?
a front

Nitrogen wastes are produced by the breakdown of what during normal metabolism?
proteins

In the humoral response, what protein substances help neutralize or eliminate toxins and pathogens in the blood and lymph?
antibodies

Most ferns produce the same type of spores and are therefore called what?
homosporous

In which way do sunspots occur?
in pairs

What is the most important source of electromagnetic waves on earth?
the sun

Conifers are the dominant phylum of gymnosperms, with the most variety of species. most are tall trees that usually bear scale-like or needle-like leaves. the thin shape of the needles and their waxy cuticle limits water loss through this?
transpiration

Connecting to the brainstem and extending down the body through the spinal column is the spinal cord. the spinal cord is a thick bundle of nerve tissue that carries information about the body to this?
brain

Where do most cubozoans live?
tropical oceans

What type of treatment is being researched that may cure or prevent genetic disorders?
gene therapy

What are the names of foul-smelling amines, formed as a part of the decay process after death?
cadaverine and putrescine

What's it called when the reaction is sped up until equilibrium is established?
favoring

What are the smallest particles of water called?
molecules

The hormone androgen increases aggressiveness and promotes what type of behaviors?
sexual

Which currents distribute heat around the planet and have a large impact on climate?
surface

What type of gas is a harmless gas that living things add to the atmosphere during respiration?
carbon dioxide

What is formed when hot lava cools?
mineral crystals

Which radiations helps sterilize medical supplies?
ionizing radiation

What type of receptors, also known as intracellular or cytoplasmic receptors, are found in the cytoplasm of the cell and respond to hydrophobic ligand molecules that are able to travel across the plasma membrane?
internal

Why is water important for the nervous system?
to prevent dehydration

What term means the tendency of a mineral to break along certain planes?
cleavage

What are the parts used in electronic devices such as computers called?
electronic components

What type of function does the long bone perform?
work as lever

Metabolism includes both anabolic and which other reaction?
catabolic

A virus is essentially dna or rna surrounded by a coat of what?
protein

What is the process of generating electric current with a magnetic field?
electromagnetic induction

Increasing what property of dirt would make it easier to rinse off your hands?
solubility

Net production efficiency allows ecologists to quantify how efficiently organisms of a particular what incorporate the energy they receive into biomass?
trophic level

Some hormones produced by the anterior pituitary regulate the production of hormones by other tissues belonging to what system?
endocrine

A warm-air heating system uses what kind of energy to heat air?
thermal

Which type of galaxies contain very little gas and dust, are red to yellow in color, contain over a trillion stars and have mostly old stars?
giant elliptical galaxies

What is a controlled scientific test that often takes place in a lab?
an experiment

What causes the endometrium to thicken during a menstrual cycle?
estradiol

What process refers to the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia?
biological nitrogen fixation

What is it called when two species evolve matching traits?
coevolution

What is the term for water that falls from clouds?
precipitation

Echinoderms lack what type of system that in humans consists of the brain and spinal cord?
centralized nervous system

What class of invertebrate animals has additional appendages called the chelicerae and the pedipalps?
arachnid

The burning of what type of fuels is a major source of sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides?
fossil

What is the science of classifying living things is called?
taxonomy

What is it called when your joints start to wear out and they become stiff and painful?
arthritis

Gas, liquid, and solid describe what property of matter?
states

Differences in fitness among different members of a population can lead to what kind of selection?
natural selection

What cells carry oxygen?
red blood cells

What coenzyme is used in the transfer of energy in muscles?
atp or adenozine triphosphate

Which asexual reproduction method do starfish use to reproduce?
fragmentation

What enables gamma rays to pass through hard matters like bones, teeth, and just about anything?
their extremely high energy

What type of mammals includes opossums, kangaroos, and koalas?
marsupials

What do we call animals that have a backbone and belong to the phylum chordata?
vertebrates

Living organisms are affected by changes in ph which can include basic conditions and what other kinds of conditions?
acidic

What makes up most of the interior of a plant?
ground tissue

What part of a plant, which is attached to its stem nodes, is the "main organ" of photosynthesis?
leaves

Experiments have shown that acceleration is exactly inversely proportional to mass, just as it is exactly linearly proportional to what?
net external force

What term describes a disease in which the immune system attacks the body’s own cells?
autoimmune

Flow of what can introduce alleles that are advantageous or ones that are disadvantageous?
genes

A life cycle continues through reproduction and what?
development

Bacteria are like eukaryotic cells in that they have cytoplasm, ribosomes, and a?
plasma membrane

When zinc metal is mixed with sulfur and heated, what is produced?
zinc sulfide

What cage composed of 12 pairs of ribs, with their costal cartilages and the sternum, protects the heart and lungs?
thoracic

What is the ability of an atom to emit charged particles and energy from its nucleus called?
radioactivity

Diffusion is an effective transport mechanism over the spatial scales typically found at what level?
cellular

In a car race on a circular track, where the start and finish line are the same, what quantity is neglible?
total displacement

What is another name for molecular compounds?
covalent compounds

The long mouth-tube that some insects  use to suck up the nectar of the flower is called what?
proboscis

Cnvs result from regions of what being duplicated or deleted inconsistently within the population?
genome

Insects can have specialized mouthparts, such as a proboscis, to siphon the nectar from what?
flowers

What is the invisible force that pulls things to earth?
gravity

What do we call the seasonal movement of animals?
migration

What kind of beneficial relationships with other organisms are common in the plant kingdom?
mutualistic

Some marine algae have evolved special structures capable of what plant process?
photosynthesis

What is the substance called whenatoms of different elements join together?
compounds

What type of solid has atoms arranged in a repeating pattern?
crystals

What is the process called when secretory cells export products?
exocytosis

Natural resources that are limited in supply and cannot be replaced except over millions of years are known as what?
nonrenewable

What is a hydrocarbon in which the carbon chain joins to itself in a ring?
cyclic hydrocarbon

The first photosynthetic organisms were not plants, but types of what that lived in the water?
bacteria

What is the second stage of photosynthesis?
production of glucose

Which layer is the lithosphere located?
outermost layer

What is speed at any given instant called?
instantaneous speed

During birth, a baby passes from the uterus through what organ to leave the body?
the vagina

What type of earthquake creates a tsunami?
underwater

What is the smallest of the galilean moons?
europa

What is the term for a combination of substances in which there is no chemical reaction?
a mixture

Where does the majority of chemical digestion occur?
small intestine

The vertebrate endoskeleton includes a vertebral column, cranium, limbs, and what else?
limb girdles

What is defined as the velocity of the object at a given moment?
instantaneous velocity

What is the term for an expression showing the relationship of the reaction rate to the concentrations of each reactant?
rate law

How many pi bonds are found in a triple bond?
two

What is formed when an acidic solution and a basic solution react together in a neutralization reaction?
salt

What is the causative agent of sleeping sickness in humans?
trypanosoma brucei

Living things that use energy to make food, both for themselves and other living things, are what part of an ecosystem?
producers

In science, what process produces evidence that helps answer questions and solve problems?
investigation

What cellular structure is used during endocytosis to allow molecules to enter the cell?
vesicles

What are unique about prokaryotic cells' organelles?
not membrane-bound

How long ago did the ancestors of mammals evolve?
300 million years

A  d. melanogaster population has an average heterozygosity of what?
14%

Traits that are affected by more than one gene are what type of traits?
polygenic traits

Pharmacist and surveyor are two career options based in what type of science?
physical

What is another term for foodborne illness?
food poisoning

The mechanical advantage of a machine is related to how it changes what?
force

What term in physics refers to the use of force to move an object?
work

What is the name of the organelle that helps make and transport proteins and lipids?
endoplasmic reticulum

What machine is used to determine the calories in food, as well as the average heat yield from burning various grades of coal and oil?
calorimeter

What is the name of the outer part of the adrenal gland located above the kidneys?
cortex

What kind of energy used heat from magma within the earth to heat homes or produce steam that turns turbines?
geothermal energy

The primary output of the basal nuclei is to the thalamus, which relays that output to where?
cerebral cortex

The central nervous system is composed of the brain and what else?
the spinal cord

A group of genetically identical individuals is called what?
a clone

Where on the earth's surface does the water cycle takes place?
on, above, and below

Under which conditions do many bacteria carry out alcohol fermentation?
anaerobic

Fermat's principle states that what will always take the path that takes the least amount of time?
light

What trend is occurring involving the extent of arctic sea ice in summer?
rapid decrease

In vertebrates, cholesterol is synthesized in which organ and obtained from the diet?
the liver

What is a group of lions called?
pride

Which layer is found below the lithosphere?
asthenosphere

What is the name for the nonliving parts of ecosystems?
abiotic factors

What do you call the electrons in the outermost energy level of an atom?
valence electrons

What are some of the giant fairy rings produced by?
mycelia

What are ingrowths on arthropod exoskeletons to which muscles attach?
apodemes

Which type of electrons plays the most important role in chemical reactions?
valence

What level is greater than 7 in a basic solution?
ph

What happens to volume as the temperature increases?
volume increases

What does an array of radio telescopes collect?
radio waves

What kind of compounds contain positively and negatively charged ions in a ratio that results in an overall charge of zero?
ionic compounds

What are formed when crystals precipitate out from a liquid?
chemical sedimentary rocks

Roundworms exemplify what type of organization, where two or more types of tissues work together to perform a particular function as an organ?
organ-level organization

Where are protons and neutrons located?
nucleus

Why do hummingbirds have long narrow bills?
to reach the nectar at the bottom of flowers

Bivalvia and gastropoda are classes of what phylum?
mollusks

Kinetic energy of moving particles of matter, measured by their temperatures are known as:
thermal energy

What is the term for a process that changes some chemical substances into others?
chemical reaction

The diagnosis of a disease or condition before the baby is born is called?
prenatal diagnosis

A heterogeneous mixture of particles of one substance distributed throughout a second substance in a different phase is known as what?
suspension

On what type of land does runoff cause more erosion?
bare

What kind of fats have been implicated in the presence of heart disease?
trans fats

Inducible enzymes usually function in what type of pathways?
catabolic

Since electrons are charged, their intrinsic spin creates a what?
intrinsic magnetic field

What do bats use to determine the location of objects?
echolocation

Caffeine is an example of what type of drug?
psychoactive

What is the use of technology to change the genetic makeup of living things for human purposes?
genetic engineering

What distinctive configuration of dna demonstrates the base-pairing nature of the bases?
double helix

Lipids are broken down by what?
lipases

What are considered to be the most basic concepts in the field of physical science?
matter and energy

What are materials that can be magnetized called?
ferromagnetic materials

Toxic compounds in the environment have the most severe impact on animals that are top-level what?
carnivores

In genetics, what do you call characteristics that are passed from a parent to child?
traits

One gram of proteins provides how many calories of energy?
four

What kind of succession occurs in an area that has never before been colonized?
primary succession

A sprain is a strain or tear in what part of the body?
a ligament

Which gland is located in the sella turcica of the sphenoid bone within the cranial floor?
pituitary gland

What is light that has only a single wavelength called?
monochromatic

Combined substances are either compounds or what?
mixtures

What are the catalysts that occur naturally in living organisms and are primarily protein molecules?
enzymes

Amino acid units in a protein are connected by what bonds?
peptide

Magnetism is due to the movement of what within atoms?
electrons

Ground subsidence is a consequences of the overuse of what?
groundwater

What organ do most fish have that is used to detect movement and vibration in the surrounding water?
lateral line

Excretion is the process of removing excess water and wastes from the body. what are the main organs of excretion?
kidneys

What is caused by the same virus that causes chicken pox?
shingles

Amniotes are animals that produce eggs with membranes possessing what property, which allowed them to lay eggs on land?
waterproof

When water particles become hot enough to overcome the force of attraction between them, what happens to the water?
it boils

In mammals, what layer protects the egg?
zona pellucida

After infecting a host, what inactive state do some viruses enter?
latency

Changes in the number of what can lead to disorders like down syndrome?
chromosomes

What are centrioles made from?
short microtubules

What of most species are resistant cells that can survive harsh conditions?
zygotes

Animals can not produce their own food making them _________.
heterotrophs

In the stomach, which material's arrival triggers churning and the release of gastric juices?
food

What is the term for seed plants?
spermatophytes

Cnidarians have a simple digestive system with a single opening surrounded by what type of structures, which are used to capture prey?
tentacles

What is the state of matter that resembles a gas, but is made of ions, giving it different properties than a typical gas?
plasma

Natural selection for what type of trait changes the distribution of phenotypes?
polygenic trait

Systemic veins return blood low in what to the right atrium?
oxygen

The three long muscles on the back of the knee are part of which group?
hamstring group

What shapes, supports, and protects the cell?
the cell wall

What process, which results because of great pressure at the center of a star, causes stars to shine?
nuclear fusion

What do we call the formation of a gas from a liquid at temperatures below the boiling point?
evaporation

What is a sugar that is found in fruits?
fructose

What are unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one triple bond between carbon atoms?
alkynes

Are ecotones wide or narrow?
can be both

Which infection of multicellular eukaryotes is usually limited to particular tissues?
viral

What is the term for the breakdown of unstable isotopes into stable elements?
radioactive decay

What are the light wavelengths that the human eye can detect called?
visible light

Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from what?
the sun

Population growth is determined by rates of birth, death, immigration, and what else?
emigration

What works by selecting for alleles that confer beneficial traits or behaviors, while selecting against those for deleterious qualities?
natural selection

Paint keeps oxygen and water from coming into direct contact with the metal, which prevents what?
corrosion

What type of electrons do all group 14 elements have four of?
valence

List the three major types of blood vessels.
arteries,capillaries, veins

Acetone is the simplest type of what organic compound that involves a carbonyl in which the carbon atom makes single bonds with two other carbon atoms?
ketone

What term is used to describe birds that hunt, eat mammals, and other birds?
raptors

What do you call a compound that contains both an amino group and a carboxyl group in the same molecule?
amino acid

What system consists of structures that produce eggs, secrete female sex hormones, and ultimately enable birth of a fetus?
female reproductive system

The medieval catapult has a heavy ballast on one end and what on the other end?
projectile

What period starts after the baby is born, and the placenta is expelled from the body?
postpartum

What do you call the lightless part of the ocean?
aphotic zone

The creation of a voltage across a current-carrying conductor by a magnetic field is known as what?
hall effect

Pavement cells, large, irregularly shaped parenchymal cells which lack chloroplasts, make up the majority of what?
epidermis

What do convergent plate boundaries with trenches have?
volcanoes

Around what percentage of the earth's surface water is contained in the ocean?
97%

What celestial structure does not give off its own light?
the moon

Which rule is a result of trends in energies and is useful in explaining why atoms form the ions that they do?
octet rule

What is the second most common type of cancer in both men and women?
lung

What is the main difference between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells?
presence of a nucleus

What is a layer of saturated porous rock?
an aquifer

What element, which often forms polymers, has a unique ability to form covalent bonds with many other atoms?
carbon

Early in the development of a human fetus, the skeleton is made entirely of what?
cartilage

What type of disease can be treated by radioactive elements in glucose?
cancer

What theory of gases describes this state of matter as composed of tiny particles in constant motion with a lot of distance between the particles?
kinetic

When egg laying and mating occur together, as in external fertilization, the certainty of what is high?
paternity

What control reproductive cycles, which are in turn regulated by environmental cues?
hormones

Which gas is responsible for global warming?
carbon dioxide

The short length of what in women is the best explanation for the greater incidence of uti in women?
urethra

What type of cells are flagella rare in?
eukaryotic

Solids and liquids are phases of matter that have their own unique what?
properties

What do many fungi secrete that break down complex molecules to smaller molecules that can be absorbed?
enzymes

All three types of convergent plate boundaries produce what destructive phenomenon?
earthquake

How do plants obtain their energy?
photosynthesis

The mouth, stomach, esophagus, small intestine, and large intestine are all part of what organ system?
digestive

An environment in which cells neither sink nor swell is known as what?
isotonic environment

Particulates from cigarette smoke that enter what structures can cause a permanent reduction in lung capacity?
alveoli

Terrestrial arthropods generally have internal surfaces specialized for what?
gas exchange

What are the two groups that tripoblastic eucoelomates can be divided into based on early embryonic development differences?
protostomes and deuterostomes

What part of the cell is surrounded by a membrane and holds the genetic information for the cell?
nucleus

What are angiosperms most important function to humans?
food

How many atoms are evenly organized around a central atom?
six

What are formed by atoms gaining electrons?
anions

What type of fish are the majority of living species?
ray-finned fish

What are the light highlands of the moon called?
terrae

The shape of earlobes is an example of what kind of trait, which is influenced by genes and passed along through generations?
inherited trait

Mosses, liverworts, and hornworts are examples of what type of plant in which gametophyte generation is dominant?
nonvascular plants

Release of spores in a suitable environment will lead to germination and a new generation of what?
gametophytes

Why are living things considered to be renewable?
they reproduce

What is the term for the metabolic reaction where living systems build new molecules?
anabolism

Name the three types of muscle tissue.
skeletal, smooth, cardiac

Cellular respiration and photosynthesis are important parts of which cycle?
carbon cycle

What are the winds that occur in belts that encircle the planet?
global winds

Human mammary glands can produce what substance, which can be used to feed children?
milk

What is a prerequisite for fertilization to take place in plants?
pollination

Water is allowed to flow downhill into a large turbine to harness power. what helps the turbine spin?
kinetic energy

The movement of bone away from the midline of the body is called what?
extension

What occurs when so much water enters a stream or river that it overflows its banks or when deep snow melts very quickly in spring?
flooding

What is the cause of the “heartburn” that occurs when acidic digestive juices escape into the esophagus?
acid reflux

By 180 million years ago, pangaea began to do what?
break up

What has  a single voltage source and a single resistor
simple circuit

What property is associated with the number of reactant molecules involved in an elementary step?
molecularity

During an earthquake, wet soils become like what?
quicksand

What helps sound travel in waves?
gases

What kind of relationship between glucagon and insulin is vital to managing fuel storage and consumption by body cells?
antagonistic

The yellowstone hot spot is a famous example of a what?
continental hot spot

Ionic compounds take on the form of extended three-dimensional arrays of cations and what else?
anions

Electric generators convert what type of energy to electric energy?
mechanical energy

What can autographs do that heterotrophs cannot do?
make their own food

The primary amine in which the nitrogen atom is attached directly to a benzene ring has a special name, what is it?
aniline

What  is formed when each sodium atom donates its single valence electron to a chlorine atom?
sodium chloride

The fujita scale measures the intensity of what weather event, based on wind speed and damage?
tornado

What allows the electrons to move in an electrochemical system.
conductor

The simplest type of battery contains what?
single cell

A newborn baby has a soft spot on the top of its head. over the next few months, the soft spot gradually does what?
hardens

Microwaves are converted into what kind of energy in a microwave oven?
thermal energy

What is the process of moving air into and out of the lungs called?
ventilation

What plays the same role in rotational motion that force plays in linear motion.
torque

Ions are charged what?
atoms

What occurs when a parent cell splits into two identical daughter cells of the same size?
fission

What kind of scientist is concerned with facets of geomorphology, topography, vegetation, and climate?
soil scientist

What was the first antiseptic called?
phenol

Which model helps explain molecules with double or triple bonds?
hybridization model

Name the plant considered to be the ancestor of plants?
green algae

How can bacterial stis usually be cured?
with antibiotics

Where do organisms acquire toxic substances from along with nutrients and water?
environment

What was the first widely used antibiotic?
penicillin

Decay of what provides some of earth's internal heat?
radioactive elements

Plants are complex organisms with tissues organized into what?
organs

What are mammals that lay eggs called?
monotremes

What do monotremes have instead of a uterus and vagina?
cloaca

What part of the body controls the responses of hunger and satiety?
brain

What kind of reactions absorb energy from their surroundings as they occur?
endothermic

Hybrid orbitals are formed only in which type of bonded atoms?
covalently

Most autotrophs make their "food" through which process, using the energy of the sun?
photosynthesis

Because heating results in a greater fraction of molecules having the necessary kinetic energy to escape the surface of the liquid, what occurs more quickly when liquid is heated?
evaporation

What is the term for a theoretical framework for describing evolutionary change in populations through the change in allele frequencies?
population genetics

In which specific organs are hormonal cells located?
endocrine glands

Found in plants and algae, chloroplasts are the site of what process?
photosynthesis

Water behind a dam has potential energy. moving water, such as in a waterfall or a rapidly flowing river, has this?
kinetic energy

What part of the cell helps it keep its shape?
cytoskeleton

What is the term for crops that are genetically modified with new genes that code for traits useful to humans?
transgenic

What is the rate at which a specific allele appears within a population called?
allele frequecy

Memory t cells are long-lived and can even persist for how long?
lifetime

What fluid becomes less viscous, allowing for better joint function after stretching?
synovial

Chains of small molecules called nucleotides make up what?
nucleic acids

What is the preferred method for separating late transition metals from their ores?
hydrometallurgy

When na 2 hpo 24 − (the weak acid) comes into contact with a strong base, such as sodium hydroxide (naoh), the weak acid reverts back to the weak base and produces what?
water

What system is designed to facilitate the transformation of food matter into the nutrient components that sustain organisms?
digestive

What are the sporophytes in ferns?
leafy plants

The measure of how much a given volume of matter decreases when placed under pressure is called?
compressibility

What are two major categories of mutations?
germline and somatic

Chemical equations in which heat is shown as either a reactant or a product are called what?
thermochemical equations

Clams, oysters, scallops, and mussels are examples of what type of species?
mollusks

What is it called when a charge moves against a field?
work

The as yet undiscovered grand unified theory is a search to unify laws of what branch of science?
physics

What basic cell structure is made up of a phospholipid bilayer and two layers of phospholipid molecules?
cell membrane

Earthworms and ants possess what type of bodies, which means division into multiple parts?
segmented

Gfci stands for ground-fault circuit what?
interrupter

What genetic unit is formed when the dna double helix wraps around proteins and tightly coils a number of times?
chromosome

What are fresh water biomes defined by?
low salt concentration

What is the amount of time a molecule stays in a reservoir known as?
residence time

What is the study of chemical processes that occur in living things?
biochemistry

What prohibits knocking out genes?
ethical considerdations

The  populations that live in the same area form this?
a community

The rate at which an unstable isotope decays is measured in a unit known as what?
half-life

If two chlorine atoms share their unpaired electrons by making a covalent bond and forming cl2, they can each complete their what?
valence shell

How many pairs of upper jaws do insects have?
two pairs

Where does the shoot system get the water and minerals that it depends on?
the soil

Potential energy is present in objects that are what?
elastic

What are flightless birds that are strong swimmers and spend much of their time in the water?
penguins

What describes how close an estimate is to a known standard?
accuracy

What is the measure of the energy released when an extra electron is added to an atom?
electron affinity

In what type of population do allele and genotype frequencies not change over time?
equilibrium population

What bodily substance is formed from cells, and in turn helps make up organs?
tissues

What is the electrode at which reduction occurs called?
cathode

Smog is one example of what type of pollution?
air

What do you call a circuit that consists of one loop, which if interrupted at any point, causes cessation of the whole circuit's electric current?
series circuit

What type of input is not required during passive transport?
energy

Which organ of our body is harmed if you get meningitis?
brain

What is the unique layer of nerve cells covering the cerebrum in mammals' brains called?
the neocortex

The direction of the rotation of hurricanes is influenced by which force?
coriolis force

The name of which ion always comes first?
positive ion

What is the most familiar fibrous protein found in your body?
keratin

Ice floats because it is less what than liquid water?
dense

Where are the pharyngeal slits located?
pharynx

What filters pathogens and worn out red blood cells from the blood?
the spleen

Muscle atrophy due to age is called what?
sarcopenia

Lead shielding is used to block what type of rays?
gamma

What sulfur compound occurs in volcanic gases and in the atmosphere near industrial plants?
sulfur dioxide

What bodily structures consist of the endothelium and its basal lamina?
capillaries

The extent to which a substance may be dissolved in water or another solvent is known as what?
solubility

What do you call cellular respiration that does not need oxygen to proceed?
anaerobic respiration

What is the name for creatures such as bears and humans that eat both consumers and producers?
omnivores

What are compounds with the same number of carbon and hydrogen atoms called?
isomers

Developing cars that run on hydrogen gas can help solve our dependence on what?
nonrenewable fossil fuels

What also receives input from other areas of the forebrain through the medial forebrain bundle?
hypothalamus

What type of science is the application of science to answer questions related to the law?
forensic

What kind of charge do iconic compounds have?
net neutral charge

A catalyst decreases the amount of what resource that is required in order to begin a chemical reaction?
activation energy

Ribozymes are rna molecules that catalyze what?
chemical reactions

In what state of matter is butter at room temperature?
solid

Ordinary table salt is called what?
sodium chloride

Secondary pollutants form from chemical reactions that occur when pollution is exposed to what?
sunlight

What is the sum of the massess of the atoms in a molecule?
molecular mass

Neutrophils and lymphocytes are examples of what type of cell?
white blood cell

What is the space around the magnet called?
magnetic field

What cannot exist between energy levels?
electrons

Transferring what from sodium to chlorine decreases the radius of sodium by about 50%?
electron

What is the name for membrane-bound sacs that function in storage and transport?
vacuoles

What structures include the vagina, uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes?
reproductive

Where do the steps in the water cycle begin?
the ocean

What does the structure of a protein start with?
amino acids

What is the small intestine lined with that helps with nutrient absorption?
villi

What visual property of soil indicates fertility and nitrogen content?
color

What waves require a material medium such as water, air, or rope?
mechanical

Which continent is covered with an ice cap?
antarctica

What type of organisms do carnivores feed on?
animals

What is the ability to be attracted by a magnet and to act as a magnet?
magnetism

What consists of the different species within an area?
biological community

What do prevailing winds influence?
climate

What do you call a process that uses microorganisms to consume a pollutant?
bioremediation

What is the term for a disturbance in matter that causes the transfer of energy from place to place?
mechanical wave

Exemplified by cesium, which ignites spontaneously in air, pure elements with a high metallic character tend to be very what?
reactive

What is the term for the use of two or more lewis structures to represent the covalent bonding in a molecule?
resonance

All eukaryotic cells have mitochondria, but not all eukaryotic cells have what?
chloroplasts

Which part of the body of amphibians, easily absorbs substances from the environment?
skin

What element do plants use to store energy as atp?
oxygen

What is the term for the deepest places on earth?
trenches

The posterior pituitary is an extension of what anatomical structure?
hypothalamus

What occurs when the cartilage at the ends of the bones breaks down?
osteoarthritis

What do the planets orbit around in the solar system?
the sun

Which period after birth has the most rapid growth?
infancy

What does sexual reproduction with gametes and fertilization produce?
diploid sporophyte

What keeps the earth orbiting the sun?
gravity

The depth of the atmosphere is greatest where?
sea level

The lungs, kidneys, skin, and large intestine are all part of what organ system?
excretory

What is the male gamete called in humans?
sperm

The lifecycle of an ascomycete is characterized by the production of what during the sexual phase?
asci

What does the concentration of a solution represent?
percentage of solute

What is the term for any behavior that occurs only after experience or practice?
learned behavior

What do we call the movement of individuals into a population from other areas?
immigration

Enzymes, proteins, electron carriers, and pumps that play roles in glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transport chain tend to catalyze reactions that are what?
non-reversible

Is purifying water a simple or complicated process?
complicated

What is a sac-like organ at the end of the esophagus?
the stomach

Substances may be either elements or what?
pure compounds

Visible light can be split into colors with the use of a what?
prism

Marshes, swamps, and bogs are types of what?
wetlands

What is the chief organ of the urinary system?
kidney

What type of winds blow over a limited area?
local winds

In terms of scientific investigation, things you notice about an environment using your five senses are called what?
observations

What is the final product of the calvin cycle?
glucose

The nail bed is a specialized structure of the epidermis that is found at the tips of our what?
fingers and toes

The anatomical arrangement of capillaries and alveoli emphasizes the structural and functional relationship of what systems?
respiratory and circulatory

What term describes all but the sex chromosomes?
autsomes

The sun and all objects held by it's gravity make up the?
solar system

From the uterus, where do sperm travel next?
fallopian tubes

What completes the process as undigested material passes out of the digestive system?
elimination

What is a thin layer of gas that surrounds earth called?
the atmosphere

What does all matter consist of?
atoms

What do you call a system that has one or more planets orbiting one or more stars?
solar system

The longest period of daylight hours occurs at the beginning of what season?
summer

H2o is the chemical formula for what?
water

What occurs when light interacts with our atmosphere?
rayleigh scattering

Layers of placental transfer cells help transport nutrients to the embryos as they develop into what?
sporophytes

The kayak’s motion in the water is an example of classical addition of what?
velocities

Introduction genetics is the study of what?
heredity

A _______ of biology is a fundamental concept that is just as true for a bee or a sunflower as it is for us.
principle

Ionic liquids heating a salt to its melting point produces a what?
molten salt

What is the term for the temperature at which a solid changes into a liquid?
the melting point

What does glycolysis generate in phase ii?
atp

These vacuoles take water from the cytoplasm and excrete it from the cell to avoid bursting due to what?
osmotic pressure

Where does the purple color in quartz come from?
iron

What is the largest part of the brain?
cerebrum

Data from paleontology offer insights into the early evolution of what?
fungi

One crystalline form of calcium carbonate is the mineral sold as what?
calcite

Human evolution shows that evolutionary changes typically occur at what pace?
slow

When bacteria enter the bloodstream, the result is what condition?
septicemia

Solid-state radiation detectors convert ionization produced in a semiconductor (like those found in computer chips) directly into what?
electrical signal

Most, if not all, of the extant animal phyla today evolved during the cambrian period, yet many of what devastating events have taken place since then?
mass extinctions

What is the name for the energy required for an electron to be added to a neutral atom in its gaseous form?
electron affinity

Carbon atoms have six neutrons as well as how many protons?
six

What term means that only molecules or ions of a certain size, shape, polarity or charge are capable of passing through the material?
selective permeation

What holds together the small molecules called nucleotides which make up nucleic acids?
covalent bonds

What type of cell contains a nucleus?
eukaryotic cell

What method uses a retailer's coding method to catalog biological specimens in museums?
dna barcoding

The level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is greatly influenced by the reservoir of carbon where?
in the oceans

Who controls prey population?
predators

In which organs does gas exchange take place between blood and air?
lungs

The frequency of sound waves is measured in what unit?
hertz

Does an increase in temperature speed up or slow down reactions?
speed up

An obstacle or opening that is shorter than the wavelength causes greater diffraction of what?
waves

Corals build hard exoskeletons that grow to become coral what?
reefs

What is the name of the procedure where an unknown compound can be analyzed in the laboratory in order to determine the percentages of each element contained within it?
elemental analysis

While spermatogenesis produces four haploid sperm cells, oogenesis produces one mature what?
ovum

What are groups of tens to hundreds of thousands of stars held tightly together by gravity called?
globular clusters

What is the general name for the homogeneous mixture that is formed when a solute dissolves in a solvent?
solution

Life itself could not exist without what energy, which plays a vital role in photosynthesis?
light energy

What does power imply is happening to energy?
being transferred

Because the masses of subatomic particles are so small, a new unit, called what, was defined?
atomic mass unit

Which organ breaks down amino acids and toxins that are in the blood?
liver

Which compound has positively and negatively charged ends?
polar compound

What system of the body is responsible for producing hormones?
endocrine system

What happens to a substance in a liquid state when the temperate is lowed?
it solidifies

Sublimation and deposition involve direct transitions between solid and gas without going through which state?
liquid

What is the process by which plants and animals increase in size?
growth

Which glands sit atop the kidneys and are composed of an outer cortex and an inner medulla, all surrounded by a connective tissue capsule?
adrenal

What is it that surrounds cells and serve to keep the insides separated from the outsides?
biological membranes

What is the gland in the chest behind the breast bone that stores some types of lymphocytes while they mature?
thymus

What promotes cell division and are necessary for growing plants in tissue culture?
cytokinins

What map shows the locations of several genes on the x chromosome?
the linkage map

Although they are as different as deserts and wetlands, all of these ecosystem units have populations of interacting species?
biomes

What is the name of the bone that forms the forehead?
frontal bone

What is the name for a molecule with two atoms?
diatomic

What type of motor is used in most household devices with moving parts?
electric motors

What process determines the dna sequence of an entire genome?
whole-genome sequencing

What disease can too little calcium cause?
osteoporosis

In a scientific investigation, what do you call a direct, physical observation of something or a process?
evidence

The volume of blood each ventricle pumps per minute is called what?
cardiac output

How does consuming enterobactin help our body?
eliminates excess iron

Green cyanobacteria on a lake produce food through what process?
photosynthesis

Because the human body is about 70% water by mass, and liquid water has high specific heat, a great deal of what is required to change its temperature?
energy

The process of making a polymer is called what?
polymerization

Behind a ship, what is the giant rectangular bucket that is dragged along from the behind called?
dredge

What is it called when multiple faults are located in close proximity to one another?
fault zone

Binding of acetylcholine to receptors on the muscle fiber leads to a?
depolarization

Most tunicates live a sessile existence in shallow ocean waters and are suspension feeders. the primary foods of tunicates are plankton and this?
detritus

Ginkgo trees are gymnosperms with broad?
leaves

Recrystallization is a process that can remove what, which result when compounds are synthesized?
contaminants

What is one of the most common biochemical compounds on earth and is found in all plants?
cellulose

What man-made structures orbit all of the inner planets as well as jupiter and saturn?
satellites

What basic structures take in nutrients from the soil and help the plant survive?
roots

What does ubiquitin indicate about a protein's lifespan?
completion

Which vertebrae carry the greatest amount of body weight and are thus characterized by the large size and thickness of the vertebral body?
lumbar vertebrae

Because of it's repeating pattern, what is mendeleev's table of the elements called?
periodic table

Where does an electron move to after it absorbs energy?
a shell farther from the nucleus

What is needed by all known forms of life?
water

What lengths are positive for converging lens and negative for diverging lens?
focal lengths

Where does most geological activity takes place?
at plate boundaries

Birds have light-weight bones that are filled with what?
air

Why does a large log burn relatively slowly compared to the same mass of wood in the form of small twigs?
smaller surface area

What is usually necessary to develop cancer?
multiple genes mutations

Consumers are organisms that depend on other organisms for what?
food

Wine, air, and gunpowder are all examples of what kind of common mixtures?
homogeneous

What is the term for anything that can cause cancer?
carcinogen

What system of organs delivers blood to all cells of the body?
cardiovascular

What part of a chromosome exists in different states of condensation at different times?
the chromatin

What do the ears have to be protected from in order to avoid hearing loss?
loud sounds

What is the first and longest phase of mitosis known as?
prophase

Plants reduce nitrate back to what before incorporating the nitrogen into organic compounds:?
ammonium

Growth factors and certain plant and animal hormones serve as molecular messengers that initiate pathways of what?
cell division

When a wave travels down a string, the string vibrates up and down at right angles to the wave's what?
direction

Generally speaking, electronegativity values ______ from left to right across a row in the periodic table and _______ down a column.
increase, decrease

The most magnetic material in nature is what?
magnetite

Goldfish, tuna, salmon, perch, and cod are examples of which group of fish?
ray-finned fish

A bicycle is an example of a compound machine made of many what?
simple machines

What is the term for a system maintaining a stable internal environment in a changeable external environment?
homeostasis

When carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible, what kind of hydrocarbon results?
unsaturated

When magma heats groundwater, it may come to the surface as a hot spring or a what?
geyser

Fish have a circulatory system with a two-chambered what?
heart

What is the measure of water potential?
megapascals

What is the largest organelle in a eukaryotic cell?
nucleus

Neurologists are physicians who specialize in disorders of what system?
nervous system

How is flowing water and blowing wind similar?
transports particles

What is the study of heredity called?
genetics

What is a disease characterized by high concentrations of glucose in the blood?
diabetes

What is responsible for the properties of metals?
the metallic bond

What is the first year of life following birth called?
infancy

Where are electrons located in relation to the nucleus?
outside the nucleus

What type of switch automatically opens a circuit if too much current flows through it?
circuit breaker

The net effect of aldosterone is to conserve and increase water levels in the plasma by reducing the excretion of what element, and thus water?
sodium

An element that is generally a poor conductor of heat and electricity is known as a ______
nonmetal

An electron in an atom is completely described by four of what?
quantum numbers

Organic compounds are molecules built around what element?
carbon

What is the term for the application of science to solve problems?
technology

What sorts of collisions do not result in an overall loss of kinetic energy?
elastic

The human genome has how many more alu elements than the chimpanzee genome?
three times

What are all of the digits that can be known with certainty in a measurement plus an estimatied last digit called?
significant figures

The human male and female reproductive cycles are controlled by the interaction of hormones from the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary with hormones from reproductive tissues and organs. in both sexes, the hypothalamus monitors and causes the release of hormones from this?
anterior pituitary gland

What property does liquid display when it interacts with glass?
property of adhesion

Where does chemical digestion mainly occur?
small intestine

What is the name of the first leaf developed inside an embryo?
cotyledon

Interconnected pathways through which carbon is recycled through the biotic and abiotic components of what?
biosphere

Composed largely of the polysaccharide chitin, the exoskeleton provides an effective barrier defense against most what?
pathogens

A wall of rocks or concrete that juts out into the ocean perpendicular to the shore is called?
groin

Oils are liquid lipids that plants use to store what?
energy

A perfectly inelastic collision reduces internal kinetic energy to the minimum it can have while still conserving what?
momentum

Which theorem states that, if a population meets certain conditions, it will be in equilibrium?
hardy-weinberg theorem

What is greatest source of hazardous waste?
industry

A circuit that consists of two loops is called a what?
parallel circuit

Hyenas and cockroaches are examples of what decomposers that consume the soft tissues of dead animals?
scavengers

What helps to convert some molecules to forms that can be taken up by other organisms?
prokaryotes

As hydrostatic pressure in the kidneys increases, what happens to the amount of water leaving the capillares?
it increases

What is the percentage of production transferred from one trophic level to the next
trophic efficiency

What is the metal part of the compound named as?
the element

How do plants and algae both make food?
photosynthesis

All dinosaurs (except those which led to birds) went extinct at the end of which period?
cretaceous

What is destroying the layer of good ozone?
air pollution

In which state does matter need to be for nuclear fusion?
plasma state

Just as salty taste involves perception of sodium ions in saliva, what taste correlates with presence of glucose?
sweet

How is eye color in humans determined?
multiple genes

What term is given to flatworms because they lack a body cavity?
acoelomates

Some soil water can flow through easily. what kind of soil is this?
permeable

What is contained in the cavity of a long bone's central shaft?
marrow

Bacterial contamination of foods can lead to digestive problems called what?
food poisoning

What can be looked at to see a record of how horses evolved?
fossil records

What natural destructive element cuts away at rock forming river valleys?
water

What do we call an interruption in the normal conduction pathway of the heart?
heart block

Mixtures that have the same composition throughout are known as what kinds of mixtures?
homogeneous

The wavelength of a what type of wave can be measured as the distance between two adjacent compressions?
longitudinal

What kind of muscle is found in the heart?
cardiac

Streamlines are smooth and continuous when flow is laminar, but break up and mix when flow is what?
turbulent

What does water treatment do to water?
removes unwanted substances

What is named after the type of enzyme they interact with in the cell?
receptor proteins

What types of genes encode transcription factors?
homeobox genes

What factor largely determines the distinguishing features of terrestrial biomes?
climate

What is the term for vascular plants that reproduce with seeds?
seed plants

What is thought to be the oldest eukaryotes?
protists

Which landmark book on evolution via natural selection did charles darwin publish in 1859?
on the origin of species

Archaeans help break down sewage in waste treatment plants, so they fulfill what important role?
decomposer

If an atom gains electrons, it becomes what?
an ion

The formula mass of a covalent compound is also called the what?
molecular mass

Both pathways that isolate a population reproductively in some form, allopatric and sympatric describe what, which means the creation of new species?
speciation

Common disease of what system include  asthma, pneumonia, and emphysema?
the respiratory system

Translucent matter is matter that transmits and does what else to light?
scatters

Diet correlates with the length of what organ system in vertebrates?
digestive

What is the process of processing used material into new ones called?
recycling

What equals the mass of the object (in kilograms) times the acceleration due to gravity (9.8 m/s 2 )?
weight

Where does visible light fall in between on the electromagnetic spectrum?
infrared light and ultraviolet light

Having polar bonds may make a covalent compound what?
polar

Shortening of muscle fibers is called what?`
contraction

About how many thunderstorms are there each year worldwide?
14 million

What are a group of protists whose monophyly is well supported by molecular systematics?
alveolates

What is measured by the intensity of the sound waves?
loudness

Parasitic fungi often cause illness and may eventually do what to their hosts?
kill them

Coronary heart disease is caused when what blocks coronary arteries?
plaque

Air is an example of what state of matter?
gas

What descend from clouds in funnel-like shapes that spin violently, producing powerful winds?
tornadoes

What term describes the long-term, predictable atmospheric conditions of a specific area?
climate

Between meals, when the level of blood glucose drops below a certain point, a signal is sent to what organ saying “make more glucose"?
liver

Where does the krebs cycle take place?
in the matrix

What state of matter is like a liquid in that particles are in contact with each other, but unlike liquids in that the intermolecular forces are strong enough to hold the particles in place?
solids

What is the term for a natural situation which arises to physically divide organisms?
vicariance

Digestion of carbohydrates is performed by several enzymes. starch and glycogen are broken down into glucose by amylase and maltase. sucrose (table sugar) and lactose (milk sugar) are broken down by sucrase and this?
lactase

What is defined as a phasic change in muscle tone?
spasticity

What is a force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are touching?
friction

What are structures that have a common function and suggest common ancestry?
homologous structures

Which  type of cell division halves the number of chromosomes?
meiosis

Objects in motion that return to the same position after a fixed period of time are said to be in what?
harmonic motion

What is the relationship of multiple action potentials from a single cell resulting in a significant change in the membrane potential?
temporal summation

Plant cells have cell walls that are made of what?
cellulose

What disease associated with smoking involves breakdown of walls of the alveoli, resulting in less gas exchange by the lungs?
emphysema

Molds and yeasts are organisms in what kingdom?
fungus

Bacteria can be used to make cheese from milk. the bacteria turn the milk sugars into what?
lactic acid

Independent assortment occurs when what go to opposite poles of the cell in anaphase i?
chromosomes

What term is used to describe an immunity that occurs after exposure to an antigen either from a pathogen or a vaccination?
adaptive immunity

Changes in temperature, ph, and exposure to chemicals may lead to permanent changes in the shape of a protein, leading to loss of function known as what?
denaturation

What term is used to describe phages capable of using both modes of replicating within a bacterium?
temperate phages

Many observatories are built on high mountains to avoid interference from what?
the atmosphere

Like earth, the moon has a distinct crust, mantle, and what else?
core

Reflection, refraction, and diffraction are examples of what type of interaction?
waves

What type of molecules are found in the hydration shell of a dissolved ion?
water

Tuataras, lizards, and snakes are members of what subclass of reptiles?
lepidosaurs

What do waves deposit in relatively quiet areas along a shore?
sand

What is the smallest unit of structure and function of all living organisms?
cell

What kind of fertilization do birds have?
internal fertilization

What is the term for an organism, or single living thing?
individual

Which of newton's laws states that the quantity of angular momentum in a closed system is fixed?
third conservation law

What is the force that slows down or stops motion?
friction

What is it called when poles are in opposite positions?
reversed polarity

What is a feature that prokaryotes lack?
nucleus

They had demonstrated that particles smaller than bacteria cause what?
disease

The wrist and base of the hand are formed by what series of small bones arranged in distal and proximal rows?
carpal

What does an underwater spider use to breathe and keep alive?
shiny air bubble

Amphibians are ectothermic vertebrates that divide their time between freshwater and what else?
terrestrial habitats

Water plus other substances makes what?
solution

What type of polarization does a negative object create>
opposite polarization

What type of particles can a beta particle be?
electron or positron

The heme parts of a hemoglobin molecule bind with what element?
oxygen

What is the term for flowering seed plants?
angiosperms

Do nonvascular or vascular plants have a dominant sporophyte generation?
vascular

In mismatch repair, other enzymes remove and replace incorrectly paired nucleotides that have resulted from what?
replication errors

What two structures are found on mars?
volcanoes and canyons

What substances dissociate into ions when dissolved in water?
ionic

Organisms that depend on other organisms for food play what role in the food chain?
consumer

What is the growing root tip protected by?
root cap

Ocean water appears cyan because microbes in the water preferentially absorb what color of light?
red

Both energy and heat can be expressed in units of what?
joules

In fact, when sitting in the sun, many ectothermic lizards have higher body temperatures than what?
mammals

In binary fission how many times does a cell split?
two

What do nonvascular plants reproduce with?
spores

The most powerful or influential individual in a group is sometimes called what?
dominant

What is the first stage of cellular respiration?
glycolysis

In which direction does heat always flow through objects?
from hotter to cooler

Like sharks, nearly the entire human skeleton during a specific pre-birth developmental stage is made of what connective tissue?
cartilage

When this forms underground, volcanoes rise?
magma

Hormones produced by what gland in the neck increase the rate of metabolism in cells throughout the body?
thyroid

When the ventricles begin to contract, pressure within the ventricles rises and blood flows toward the area of lowest pressure, which is initially in the atria. this backflow causes the cusps of the tricuspid and mitral (bicuspid) valves to close. these valves are tied down to the papillary muscles by these?
chordae tendineae

What is the skin of most reptiles covered with?
scales

Gasoline, natural gas, fuel oil, diesel fuel, jet fuel, coal, kerosene, and propane are examples of what type of fule?
hydrocarbon fuel

Nearly all life processes depend on what substance, which is involved in biochemical reactions?
water

What has increased in the atmosphere throughout the history of the earth?
oxygen

Which two states of matter have definite volumes?
solids and liquids

Tendon, cartilage, and bone are examples of what type of tissue that supports and binds other tissues of the body?
connective tissue

What is the sac-like organ at the end of the esophagus?
stomach

Which class of acids acetic acid (ch 3 cooh) belongs to?
organic acids

What happens to the total energy of the system when heat is positive?
it increases

What type of species can alternate between medusa and polyp forms?
cnidarian

Extensive and intensive are categories of properties that apply to what?
matter

The vertebrate circulatory system enables blood to deliver ________ and remove wastes throughout the body.
oxygen and nutrients

By what kind of change can a chemical change be reversed?
another chemical change

Earthquakes at convergent plate boundaries mark the location of the what?
subducting lithosphere

New seafloor forms when what object cools?
lava

What are groups of atoms that behave as a single unit called?
molecules

Hormones cause cellular changes by binding to receptors on these?
target cells

Food provides what type of energy needed by organisms, which is stored in bonds?
chemical energy

Catabolic reactions involve breaking what?
bonds

Scientists explain the world based on what?
observations

What is the general name for saturated hydrocarbons?
alkanes

Changing electric and mnagnetic fields radiate outward when?
charged particles accelerate

What significant part of the cell do prokaryotic cells lack?
a nucleus

Where do ectotherms get most of their heat?
external sources

What layer is above the mesosphere?
thermosphere

What is produced by leydig cells in the embryonic testis and stimulates the development of male sexual organs?
testosterone

What is a continuous flow of electric charges called?
electric current

What causes high winds and monsoon storms in the desert?
high summer temperature

What are the three most common protective devices?
fuses, circuit breaks & surge protectors

Which veins return oxygen-rich blood from the lungs to the heart?
pulmonary

Makemake and pluto are classified as what type of celestial object?
dwarf planets

What do you call the entire range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves?
electromagnetic spectrum

Joules and calories are the units of what?
energy and heat

The brain and spinal cord are part of what system?
central nervous system

The two parathyroid glands are located behind what gland?
thyroid

Fission is a method of what type of reproduction exhibited by some planarians?
asexual

The best method for preparing pure phosphorous acid is by hydrolyzing what?
phosphorus trichloride

What bonds result from the overlap of atomic orbitals?
covalents

What is a cluster of neuron cell bodies in the pns called?
ganglion

Unlike the passive form, the sodium-potassium pump uses what type of transport?
active

On insects, what are the openings on the sides of the abdomen that allows respiration to occur?
spiracles

Salts of weak acids or bases can affect the acidity or what of their aqueous solution?
basicity

Flowers, double fertilization, and fruits are unique features of what life cycle?
angiosperm

What is most often the cause of encephalitis?
viruses

Why do microwaves have a higher energy than radio waves?
higher frequency

What is cytology.
the study of cell structure

When solids change to gasses, they generally pass through what other state?
liquid

What is the structure which hangs from a newly hatched salmon larva?
yolk sac

What is made up of the pinna, ear canal, and eardrum?
the outer ear

What type of solvents is glucose insoluble in?
nonpolar

What organ is divided into the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum?
small intestine

Ectotherms undergo a variety of changes at the cellular level to acclimatize to shifts in what?
temperature

A comet striking the earth may have caused mass extinction, this would have decreased sunlight, which would have effected what plant process reducing food?
photosynthesis

Normal body temperature is ideal for most of what type of reactions?
biochemical

What separates and strongly unites bodies of adjacent vertebrae?
intervertebral disc

About 20 percent of carbon dioxide is bound by hemoglobin and is transported where?
lungs

Which outermost secondary xylem layers transport water?
the youngest

What did volcanic gases help to form on earth?
atmosphere

What is formed when the ceiling of an underground cave collapses?
sinkhole

What type of muscle makes up most of the heart?
cardiac muscle

What measures the amount of water in the air?
humidity

Most terrestrial vertebrates have what type of lungs?
internal

What process joins two haploid gametes into a diploid zygote?
fertilization

Planets are held by the force of gravity in elliptical orbits around what?
sun

What is the fastest land animal?
cheetah

What is the process by which the remains of living things become fossils?
fossilization

Meters, such as those in analog fuel gauges on a car, are a common application of magnetic torque on a current-carrying what?
loop

What causes reduction of elasticity in all organs?
age

How many protons and electrons each do carbon atoms have?
six

What thickens the cortex around the inner edge of a cell?
microfilaments

What value of dissolved substances is higher than that of their corresponding precipitate?
entropy

Is an acid lower or higher than 7 on the ph scale?
lower than 7

Although what biochemicals circulate throughout the body and come into contact with many different cell types, they only affect cells that possess the necessary receptors?
hormones

The right atrium receives all of the systemic venous return. most of the blood flows into either the superior vena cava or this?
inferior vena cava

Tissue is made up of layers of tightly packed cells that line the surfaces of the body, such as skin.
epithelial tissue

Most lipid hormones are derived from what?
cholesterol

A fact or question is only considered science if it has what property?
it is testable

Which branch of science is the study of energy, matter, and their interactions?
physics

What is the smallest unit capable of life known as?
a cell

Making associations between experiences is often a part of what activity?
learning

The spectrum is made up of discrete lines representing transitions of the hydrogen electron between specific energy levels within what?
the atom

In the field of biodiversity, "richness" and "abundance" are used to describe different what?
species

Nitrogen is an important macronutrient because it is part of nucleic acids and proteins. atmospheric nitrogen, which is the diatomic molecule n2, or dinitrogen, is the largest pool of nitrogen in these?
terrestrial ecosystems

What is the term for rotation of a bone toward the midline of the body?
medial rotation

What cause rabies, measles, diarrheal diseases, hepatitis, polio, and cold sores?
viruses

What are the two methods in which mutations arise in dna?
induced or spontaneous

Water follows where sodium ions lead, due to what process?
osmosis

What group of simple organisms recycles nutrients and has been on earth since long before multicellular life appeared?
prokaryotes

What is the term for dry climate regions at higher altitudes that have short grasses and low bushes?
steppes

Changing the frequency of sound waves, will change the _________ of the sound of a musical instrument?
pitch

What does the term porifera means?
pore-bearing

What zone is the narrow strip along the coastline that is covered by water at high tide and exposed to air at low tide?
intertidal zone

Integral and peripheral proteins are associated with what fatty bilayer?
lipid

What effect describes how earth’s rotation steers winds and surface ocean currents?
coriolis

What type of shape does sodium chloride have?
cubic

In what form of matter is hydrogen at room temperature?
gas

What is the smallest contractile portion of a muscle?
sarcomere

Which is the fourth planet from the sun?
mars

What type of sti is characterized by blisters?
genital herpes

Radioactive isotopes are characterized by an unstable what?
nuclei

What exposure risk comes with aerobic respiration?
oxygen toxicity

What are mammals called that reproduce by laying eggs?
monotremes

In multicellular organisms, only mutations in cell lines that produce gametes can be passed to what?
offspring

What type of invertebrates are jellyfish and corals known as?
cnidarians

Living things are highly organized following a hierarchy that includes atoms, molecules, organelles, cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems. organisms, in turn, are grouped as populations, communities, ecosystems, and this?
biosphere

Carbonic acid can dissociate into hydrogen carbonate ions and what?
protons

Respiration cycles the organic carbon into which gas?
carbon dioxide

What type of bonds between the bases at the center of the dna double helix hold the helix together?
hydrogen bonds

What are changes in makeup and chemical properties of matter called?
chemical changes

Mammals generate heat primarily by maintaining a high rate of what?
metabolism

The fossil record indicates that anthropoids began diverging from other primates about how many million years ago?
50

What is the oxygen carrying component of red blood cells called?
hemoglobin

What is a disease in which the immune system makes an inflammatory response to a harmless antigen?
an allergy

The umbilical cord connects the fetus to what structure?
placenta

The vector of what organism is significant on a map showing the location of malaria?
mosquito

What is the smallest particle of an element that still has the properties of that element is called?
atom

What is already causing food and water shortages and species extinctions?
global warming

What is the foundation species of coral reef ecosystems?
coral

When the ph of precipitation is lowered because of air pollution, what results?
acid rain

What type of barrier physically blocks pathogens from entering the body?
mechanical

In what do a roundworm's eggs pass from host to the environment?
feces

What is the name of the command center of the cell?
nucleus

What does the ending 'ology' refer to?
study of

What is the only natural phenomenon that causes more damage than earthquakes?
hurricanes

What is the hypothesis that states that the biosphere is its own living organism?
gaia hypothesis

The kinetic energy of molecules is generally proportionate to what other property that they have?
temperature

Several neuropeptides, relatively short chains of amino acids, serve as neurotransmitters that operate via metabotropic what?
receptors

What kind of process is boiling?
isothermal

In science, what is constantly tested, sometimes revised, sometimes thrown out and sometimes well-established?
a theory

What is the name of the process in which both the system and its environment can return to exactly the states they were in by following the reverse path?
reversible process

What must be present on a plant where ladybugs will lay their eggs?
aphids

In birds, lightweight air-filled bones and a large four-chambered heart are examples of adaptations for what purpose?
flight

Chemical and solar cells are devices that change chemical or light energy to what?
electrical energy

Stoichiometric coefficients are used in chemical equations to indicate the amounts of reactants and what?
products

Like acetic acid, pentanoic acid is what kind of acid?
carboxylic

A solute generally has what effect on the boiling point of a solvent?
raises

What type of climates are found around the equator?
tropical

What kind of planet do we consider ceres to be?
dwarf planet

How many pairs of legs does a millipede have per body segment?
two

What is the fertilization step in the sexual reproduction of plants?
pollination

How do you add two dimensional vectors?
geometrically

The fact that all living things share the same biochemical building blocks is molecular evidence of what theorized process?
evolution

When the monocilia are defective, what is disrupted?
signaling

What is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected light?
image

Hypoxia is a condition of the reduced supply of what?
oxygen

What part of an atom is positive due to the presence of positively charged protons?
nucleus

Organs of what male biological system include the penis, testes, and epididymis?
reproductive system

At certain times of year, a stream or river may overflow its banks. what is the area of land that is flooded called?
floodplain

What are the major types anchoring proteins?
claudins and occludins

The process where an atomic nucleus breaks apart into two less massive nuclei is known as ______.
fission

Sugar and starch are examples of what type of nutrient?
carbohydrates

What term describes a property of a liquid based on the strength of its intermolecular forces?
vapor pressure

What do a river and all its tributaries make up?
river system

What structure is the site of all of the basic biochemical processes that keep organisms alive?
cell

How does the magnetic field produced by a current in a wire move?
in concentric circles

What are the 3 types of volcanoes?
composite, shield, cinder cones

The fast motion of gas particles gives them a relatively large amount of what energy?
kinetic energy

When do alkane reactions usually occur?
under extreme conditions

What do you call scientists that study the weather, specifically?
meteorologists

What replicates in the s phase of interphase, resulting in chromosomes composed of two linked sister chromatids?
dna

What is located beneath the lithosphere?
asthenosphere

What travels 9.5 trillion kilometers a year?
light

What population on earth is already harming the environment due to less resources to go around?
humans

What is the female reproductive structure of a flower called?
the pistil

Red giants are stars that fuse what element into larger atoms?
helium

What normal bodily occurrence can cause skeletal muscles to involuntarily contract?
reflexes

What is the outer layer of the adrenal gland called?
adrenal cortex

Why would prokaryotes be chemotrophs instead of phototrophs in a deep-sea hydrothermal vent?
lack of light

How do wolves learn to hunt as a group?
observational learning

What is the common term for water in its solid state?
ice

If an air mass forms over an ocean it is called what type of air mass?
maritime

What is the middle layer that hair pass through before exiting at the surface of the skin?
epidermis

High per capita use of what means the ecological footprint of the united states is large?
resources

Lakes, ponds, streams, springs, and wetlands are?
fresh water bodies

What is the the force of attraction that holds together ions?
ionic bond

What is the ability of a material to return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed?
elasticity

How much of the soil is made of pieces of rock and minerals?
about half

Comprised mainly of collagen and associated with long bones and the skull, hyaline is the most widespread type of what?
collagen

Bacterial dna is contained in one circular chromosome, located where?
cytoplasm

During which phase is the moon more than half lit but not full?
gibbous phase

What force is caused by microscopic bumps, lumps, and imperfections colliding?
friction

What is the period during which humans become sexually mature called?
puberty

What is another word for brooding-  keeping eggs warm while the embryos develop?
incubation

Which type of natural disturbance in temperate grasslands, can be caused by a lightning strike?
fire

What is another name for mother of pearl?
nacre

What type of salts are secreted into the small intestine to aid in the digestion of fats?
bile

Lavas that cool underwater are called what?
pillow lavas

What is oceanography the study of?
oceans

What tissue system has neither dermal nor vascular tissues?
ground tissue system

Around 97% of all water on earth is what type of water?
salt water

Which type of diabetes is more common?
type 2

All waves are the way energy travels through what?
matter

What  is the cause of behavioral difference between populations?
genetic differences

What is the term for the process in which glucose is made using light energy?
photosynthesis

Skeletal muscle tissue is arranged in bundles surrounded by this?
connective tissue

What element on the periodic table forms the most diverse compounds?
carbon

As the number of unpaired electrons increases, what happens to the magnetic moment?
gets larger

What kind of container is used to measure heat changes during a chemical reaction or physical process?
calorimeter

In the mammal family, what is the name for hoofed animals, such as deer, sheep, goats, pigs, buffalo, elephants and giraffes?
ungulates

In the nematic phase, only the long axes of the molecules are parallel, and the ends are staggered at random intervals. in the smectic phase, the long axes of the molecules are parallel, and the molecules are also arranged in planes. finally, in thecholesteric phase, the molecules are arranged in layers; each layer is rotated with respect to the ones above and below it to give it this?
spiral structure

What term means the force of attraction that holds together oppositely charged ions?
ionic bond

In single-celled organisms, plasma membrane extensions, such as whip-like flagella or brush-like cilia, aid in what?
movement

What is defined as male gametes that form in the testes and mature in the epididymis?
sperm

All planets exhibit the same or nearly the same direction and shape of what path around the sun?
orbit

What do you call a change in the dna or rna sequence?
mutation

What is produced when hydrogen gas and oxygen gas are ignited?
water

What is the term for the buildup of electric charge on an object, which can be transferred to another when touched?
static electricity

What is the basis of the classification of protists?
traits shared

What is the movement of animals from one place to another called?
migration

What does the respiratory system exchange between the body and the outside air?
gases

In the body, second in volume to intracellular fluid is what type of fluid, which surrounds cells that are not blood cells?
interstitial fluid

How many sperm does it take to fertilize an egg?
1

The volume of a regularly shaped solid can be calculated from its what?
dimensions

What is approximately the average stroke volume in humans?
70 ml

Systemic communication through the phloem helps integrate the functions of the whole what?
plant

What structure shows the bonding between atoms, with dots representing available electrons?
lewis structure

What is a thick, dark brown or black liquid found in rock layers of the earth's crust?
oil

What are indestructible and constantly in motion?
atoms

What kind of reaction do you see when the concentration of reactants is higher?
faster reaction rate

What part of a plant protects the plant cell, maintains its shape, and prevents excessive uptake of water?
wall

The process of splitting atoms creates what kind of waste?
radioactive

Chromosomal alterations are mutations that change what?
chromosome structure

When an atom gains or loses an electron it becames an?
ion

What is a type of cell that supports neurons and maintains their environment?
glial cell

The coordinated activities of the legume and the rhizobium bacteria depend on what between the partners?
chemical signals

The purpose of scientific investigations generally is to test a what?
hypothesis

The most common curved mirrors are what?
spherical

What type of tissue covers the outside of a plant in a single layer of cells called the epidermis?
dermal

In a molecular compound, electrons are shared between atoms in which type of bond?
covalent

What process does water undergo to leave behind dissolved substances?
evaporation

What type of proteins bind to foreign substances and attempt destruction?
antibodies

Photosynthesis involves reactions that are dependent on what?
light

Like simple hormone pathways, hormone cascade pathways typically involve what kind of feedback?
negative

The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets what?
land

What causes cobalt chloride to turn pink?
co 2+ ions

What bodily defense can be acquired in an active or passive way, and can be natural or artificial?
immunity

Like the stem, what basic plant structure contains vascular bundles composed of xylem and phloem?
leaf

What kind of symmetry do echinoderm larvae have?
bilateral

Reducing waste, as well as reusing and recycling resources, can help save what?
natural resources

What is a person who studies the frequency and distribution of disease within human populations and environments called?
epidemiologist

In adaptive radiation, what is the name of the initial species that then subsequently becomes multiple other ones?
founder

The structures of both trifluoramine and hydroxylamine are similar to that of what?
ammonia

What protects reptiles from drying out?
scales

How many chromosomes do bacterial dna have?
one circular chromosome

What makes blue cheese blue?
fungus

What type of evolution often happens in species that have symbiotic relationships?
coevolution

Helicopter pilots can recover from piloting errors by decreasing altitude, turning some of their potential energy into what kind of energy?
kinetic

Rise divided by run is called what?
slope

Where did west nile first appear?
north america

How do cancer cells typically spread from one part of the body to another?
bloodstream

The rate of the accumulation of neutral what serves as a type of population-based biological clock?
polymorphisms

The transmitted light strikes a photoelectric tube, which converts the light energy to?
electricity

About how many grams of carbohydrates are in a typical apple?
20

What is the smallest unit of a chemical element called?
atom

What is the term for a scalar measure of how quickly an object is moving along this line?
speed

A redox reaction rearranges what subatomic particles?
electrons

What substances digest the food in the vacuole of an ingestive protist?
enzymes

What type of force allows non-polar molecules to interact?
london dispersion

What is a thin layer of bacteria that sticks to a surface?
a biolfilm

The amount of water vapor in the air and the temperature of the medium affects how fast what travels?
sound

An rna codon reading guu encodes for what?
valine

Scanning acoustic microscopes use what kind of waves to scan a specimen?
sound waves

The contents of which organ are mixed every 20 seconds?
the stomach

How many chambers are in a reptiles heart?
three

What is the opening in the front of the eye called?
pupil

When salinity and pressure increase, or when temperature decreases, what happens to water density?
increases

The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle is called this?
diffraction

What controls the shape of a developing zygote early in its development?
gap genes

What happens to structural genes in the presence of tryptophan?
they are not transcribed

What type of pressure may build up inside the cell when water moves into a cell by osmosis?
osmotic pressure

What is the process by which plants make their own food called?
photosynthesis

Conductivity, oxidation state and physical appearance are properties that help determine whether what are metals?
elements

What specific part of the brain regulates the endocrine system?
hypothalamus

Chemical reactions follow which laws?
thermodynamics

There are three basic types of hormones: lipid-derived, amino acid-derived, and what?
peptide

Fertilization occurs when an egg and sperm come together to form a what?
zygote

The explosion of nitroglycerin, which releases large volumes of gases, is what type of reaction?
exothermic

What done ozone help protect against?
ultraviolet rays

What category of food includes sugars, starches and fibers?
carbohydrates

What are substances that the body needs for energy, building materials, and control of body processes?
nutrients

What law shows the relationships among temperature, volume, and pressure?
combined gas

What 2 things keep polar bears warm in their arctic ecosystem?
thick fur, blubber

What two things are a phospholipid molecules composed of?
hydrophillic head , and hydrophobic tails

When plants reproduce, the offspring has characteristics similar to the?
parents

Algae are like plants mainly because they contain what?
chloroplasts

The radius of an atom is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei in a molecule consisting of two identical atoms joined by what?
covalent bond

What is it called when a mistake occurs in dna replication.
mutation

Birds are thought to have evolved around 150 million years ago from what?
theropod dinosaurs

The mostly subterranean lifestyle of stone plants reduces water loss from evaporation and inhibits what?
photosynthesis

What is the term for the process in which an area that has never before been colonized changes through time?
ecological succession

All the major landmasses moved together to form one supercontinent in which period?
permian

A problem with using food chains to describe ecosystems is that some organisms can feed on or be consumed by species from more than one of what level?
trophic level

What is the practical application of scientific principles and discoveries to develop things that make our lives easier?
engineering

In plants, a cell plate is formed during cell cytokinesis by golgi vesicles fusing at the what?
metaphase plate

What is the type of volcano with a tall cone shape that you picture when picturing a volcano?
composite

The amount of what entering the eyes helps control the biological clock?
light

Protists are classified as animal-like, plant-like, or what else?
fungus-like

Satellite and schwann cells are the two types of what kind of cell found in the pns?
glial

What compound has positive and negative ions?
ionic

What can be calculated given the mass and speed of an object?
kinetic energy

Earthquakes mark the motions of colliding plates and the locations where plates plunge into what?
the mantle

The ambrosia beetle bores holes in?
tree bark

What effect, related to weather forecasting, occurs not only for sound but for any wave when there is relative motion between the observer and the source?
doppler

What is the science of how traits are passed from parents to offspring?
heredity

When an electron transitions from an excited state to a less excited state, or ground state, the difference in energy is emitted as a what?
photon

Water from the land and oceans enters the atmosphere by which process?
evaporation

What country put seven salyut space stations into orbit between 1971 and 1982?
soviet union

The result of what, in places like the amazon rainforest, is that food will be harder to produce, clean water will be harder to find, and development of new medicines will become slower?
biodiversity loss

What does rising and sinking air influence in a region?
precipitation

Refracting and reflecting telescopes are optical telescopes that use lenses to gather what?
light

Via what process do substance move from one cell to another?
plasmodesmata

What is a stellar remnant that is very dense?
white dwarf

What methods allow scientists to add to scientific knowledge and gain a better understanding of the world?
through investigations

What is the largest level of organization?
organism

Living species of chordates are classified into three major subphyla: vertebrata, urochordata, and what?
cephalochordata

What force explains why a tennis ball bounces differently on different surfaces, and shoes slip on some surfaces but stick on others?
friction

The term ion applies to entire molecules that are?
electrically charged

Silicon and germanium react with nitrogen at high temperature to form what?
nitrides

What bond is the force of attraction that holds together oppositely charged ions?
ionic

What is the pairing of an adult male to an adult female to produce young?
mating

The cell expels waste and other particles through a process called what?
exocytosis

What are diodes, transistors, and integrated circuits examples of?
electronic components

Shedding of dead cells ensures constant renewal of what outer layer of the skin?
epidermis

What causes cumulus clouds to grow upward?
convection currents

What term is used to describe a region getting significantly less precipitation than normal for an extended period of time?
drought

What is the name for compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen?
hydrocarbons

What human disease is caused by a defective enzyme that is unable to produce melanin, the pigment responsible for the color of skin and hair?
albinism

Individuals with sickle cell anemia have crescent-shaped what?
red blood cells

Nearly all weather occurs in the lower part of what?
the atmosphere

For skeletal development, the most common template is what?
cartilage

The body's second line of defense against pathogens includes which response?
inflammatory

Hiv is a retrovirus, which means it reverse transcribes its rna genome into what?
dna

Plants can tell the time of day and time of year by sensing and using various wavelengths of what
sunlight

In eukaryotes, the major mechanism for shuffling genes is what?
sexual reproduction

The vas deferens and ejaculatory ducts transport sperm from the epididymes to the urethra in what system?
male reproductive system

What do nearly all animals have in common with regards to digestion?
internal digestion of food

What are the secretions released by the endocrine glands called?
hormones

What are chromosomes in the same pair called?
homologous chromosomes

What do you call plastids that contain the green pigment chlorophyll?
chloroplasts

What important and unusual physical property (for birds) do ostriches and penguins share?
flightlessness

What are changes in membrane potential that vary continuously with the strength of a stimulus are known as?
graded potentials

The moon has a crust, mantle, and a?
core

What type of coal is formed at lower temperatures?
bituminous

What can sodium ions not pass through?
nonpolar lipid bilayer

What happens when the kidneys cannot remove wastes from the blood?
kidney failure

What is another name for nearsightedness?
myopia

What is the innermost layer of the sun called?
the core

What device is used to study charge?
electroscope

What term is used to describe large numbers of species that go extinct in a short amount of time?
mass extinction

What is the tiny male gametophyte enclosed in a tough capsule?
pollen

When zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid, the reaction bubbles vigorously as which type of gas is produced?
hydrogren

Structural adaptations in flying animals often contribute to reduced what?
body mass

What diagram is used to reflect evolutionary relationships among organisms or groups of organisms?
phylogenetic tree

What is the energy called that is stored in matter?
potential

What is the term for traits that show wide variation, such as height, skin color, and eye color?
polygenic traits

Which system in the human body consists of the heart, a network of blood vessels, and blood?
cardiovascular system

Volume is another way of measuring what?
material

What do you call a science that aims to find solutions to practical problems?
applied science

What term describes weathering that occurs as water expands when it freezes, wedging apart rock?
mechanical weathering

How many pairs of chromosomes are found in human cells?
23

An aqueous solution is a homogeneous mixture in which the most abundant component is what?
water

What happens to light when it reflects from a rough surface?
gets diffused

Isothermal expansion is a process occurring without a change in?
temperature

Nearly all fish reproduce sexually and have what?
separate sexes

Cilia and flagella are generally associated with what function in organisms, whether the function is internal or external?
movement

Do particles collide more in two reactants when they are both in fluid forms or solid forms?
fluid

The process of moving from areas of high amounts to areas of low amounts is called what?
diffusion

Vascular tissue allowed these plants to do what?
grow taller

What were the first forms of life on earth?
prokaryotes

What warms the base of the mantle creating convection currents there?
the hot core

What do we call an incorrect test result that should have been positive?
false negative

The conversion factor between solubility and molar solubility of a compound is known as what?
molar mass

What describes the process of vesicles fusing with the plasma membrane and releasing their contents to the outside of the cell?
exocytosis

Out of the four ways that allele frequencies of a population can be changed, which way is caused by individuals leaving or joining the population?
gene flow

What kind of bond doesn't form molecules, but instead forms crystals?
ionic bonds

Where does the natural synthesis of lactose occur?
mammary tissue

The ratio between the radii of a wheel and axle determines what?
ideal mechanical advantage

What is the first stage of cellular respiration called?
glycolysis

Many species use their body shape and coloration to avoid being detected by what?
predators

A reference point is used in measurement to make what?
estimation

Why do adult herbivores in a herd surround their young?
to protect them as they are vulnerable to predators

When orders are sent from your brain to your legs, these signals pass through what type of cells?
nerve cells

What is the leading cause of soil erosion?
running water

What class of organisms help decompose matter to release nutrients and make nutritious food for other organisms ?
fungi

A pedigree is a chart which shows the inheritance of a trait over several what?
generations

The release of calcium ions initiates what?
muscle contractions

The electron released during beta decay is not an orbital electron but an electron whose origin was where?
in the nucleus

What is created by the polymerization of glucose?
cellulose

Fungi reproduce asexually by fragmentation and either sexually or asexually via what lightweight, windblown structures?
spores

The desire to understand how and why things happen is shared by all branches of what?
science

The scientific revolution took place where starting in the 1500s?
europe

Ionic bonds are electrostatic attractions between two oppositely charged what?
ions

What is the theoretical event that began the universe often called?
big bang

In the cardiovascular system, net filtration pressure represents the interaction of osmotic pressures and what other pressures?
hydrostatic

What attracts the earth to the sun?
gravity

Fermat’s principle states that light will always take the path of least amount of?
time

Many enzymes require nonprotein helpers for what activity?
catalytic

What is often a result of untreated atherosclerosis?
a heart attack or stroke

The hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine are released by what?
adrenal medulla

How many possible alleles do the majority of human genes have?
two or more

What occurs during the new moon and full moon, due to gravitational pull?
spring tides

Alleles that carry deadly diseases are usually which type?
recessive

What releases fatty acids and other components from fats and phospholipids?
enzymatic hydrolysis

What kind of energy comes from the position of a charged particle in an electric field?
potential energy

What does interstellar medium consist of?
thinly spread gas and dust

Sickle-cell disease significantly impairs the function of what?
circulatory system

What is the enlarged tip of the penis called?
glans penis

What do you call the point at which the entire weight of a body may be considered to be concentrated?
center of gravity

At how many places does points source pollution enter water?
one

What do monarch butterfly larvae depend on for their food?
milkweeds

As lava cools, tiny iron-rich crystals line up with earth’s what?
magnetic field

What do we call the amount of time a substance is stored in a reservoir?
residence time

Osmotic pressure is important in biological systems because cell walls are what?
semipermeable membranes

When does the diploid zygote form?
after the pollen tube

What is the minimum number of times a partial lunar eclipse will occur each year?
two

Microscopes were first developed in the early 1600s by this trade?
eyeglass makers

What do we call the temperature at which a substance melts?
melting point

What is the small, dense region at the center of the atom that consists of positive protons and neutral neutrons?
nucleus

By  multiplying the force applied by the perpendicular component of the moment arm,what is determined?
torques

What carry messages from our sensory organs and others to the central nervous system?
nerves

What do you call the space around a charged particle where the particle exerts electric force on other charged particles?
electric field

Natural convection is driven by what forces?
buoyant

Materials that can be magnetized are called?
ferromagnetic materials

The overall purpose of the light-dependent reactions is to convert light energy into this?
chemical reactions

Jellyfish belong to which phylum?
cnidaria

Along with changes in the shape of the resonant cavity, growth of what organ in pubescent boys leads to the difference in predominant frequencies in speech between men and women?
larynx

What intensifies the response during homeostasis?
positive feedback loops

What is captured by the sticky structure at the top of the style called the stigma?
pollen

What is the term for a sac filled with fluid or other material?
cyst

What organ protects the body from injury, water loss, and microorganisms?
skin

In which phase do the sister chromatids separate?
anaphase

Pinocytosis or "cellular drinking," occurs when the plasma membrane folds inward to form a channel allowing dissolved substances to enter what?
cell

Adult tunicates also develop a sac, called a what?
tunic

What is the common measure of how hot or cold something is?
temperature

Aquatic biomes in the ocean are called what?
marine biomes

Oxygen reaches what veinless part of the eye by diffusing through its tear layer?
cornea

Compound light microscopes use lenses to do what?
focus light

What are the "code words" of the genetic code?
codons

What processes allow for the greatest range of rotation within the vertebral column and facilitate the movement of the head?
articular

What property does coulomb electric force depend upon?
electric charge

What is the process of changing something from a gas to a liquid?
condensation

What are the two divisions of vascular plants?
seedless and seed

What contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen in a ratio of 1:2:1?
carbohydrate

During interphase of what process, each chromosome is duplicated, and the sister chromatids formed during synthesis are held together at the centromere region by cohesin proteins?
meiosis

Like animals, cyanobacteria possess what kind of biological rhythm?
circadian rhythm

The ocean is the largest marine biome. it is a continuous body of salt water that is relatively uniform in chemical composition; it is a weak solution of mineral salts and decayed what?
biological matter

What two tubes extend from the upper corners of the uterus?
fallopian

What term describes a wave in which particles of the medium vibrate at right angles, or perpendicular, to the direction that the wave travels?
transverse wave

Exemplified by rusty iron, what process is defined as the disintegration of a material due to chemical reactions with other substances in the environment?
corrosion

What is a renewable resource that can take thousand of years to form?
soil

Impenetrable what underlies the soil of the forest?
bedrock

What is the term for when two opposing processes reach the same speed, resulting in no overall change?
equilibrium

What term describes the number and kinds of species in a location or on the planet?
biodiversity

What energy is stored in a person or object?
potential energy

What do we call a peptide hormone composed of nine amino acids that lowers blood pressure?
bradykinin

Which lymphoid organ is situated in the upper chest?
thymus

What is calculated by subtracting the smallest value from the largest value?
the range

Birds actually have two basic types of feathers: flight feathers and?
down feathers

What is the name for the process of charging an object by touching it with another charged object?
charging by conduction

Labor is the muscular contractions to expel the fetus and placenta from where?
uterus

What are topographic maps that show water depths called?
bathymetric maps

What is the radula made mostly of?
chitin

Energy transferred solely due to a temperature difference is called?
heat

In which organ does a baby develop?
uterus

What part of an experiment or other investigation consists of the individuals or events that are studied?
sample

The intentional release or spread of agents of disease is known as what?
bioterrorism

If pressure is exerted on the rock from one direction, the rock forms layers. this is called what?
foliation

What term is used to describe the average weather of a place over many years?
climate

A long chain of monosaccharides linked by glycosidic bonds is known as what?
polysaccharide

How do genes located on separate nonhomologous chromosomes sort?
independently

What type of mass movement is a sudden movement of large blocks of rock and soil down a slope?
slump

What consists of structures that produce eggs and secrete female sex hormones?
female reproductive system

Lactic acid fermentation is common in muscle cells that have run out of what?
oxygen

How many sets of chromosomes does each somatic cell have?
two

Nonflowering vascular plants have three basic types of leaves: microphylls, fronds, and what other type?
needles

What is the most common plant-like protist?
unicellular algae

What biochemicals mediate changes in target cells by binding to specific receptors?
hormones

New land can be created when what happens to a volcano?
it erupts

To calculate acceleration without a change in direction, you just divide the change in velocity by the change in what?
time

What is reduced and forms part of the gelatinous disks sandwiched between the vertebrae in humans?
the notochord

What type of relationship is parasitism?
symbiotic relationship

What two things are used in optical instruments to reflect or refract light?
mirrors and lenses

What physical property of matter reflects how closely packed the particles of matter are?
density

What type of boiling point do nonmetals normally have?
low

Coxal glands collect liquid waste from what?
blood

The main organs of the cardiovascular system are the blood vessels and what else?
heart

What substance flows over the land from precipitation or melting snow or ice?
water

Most turtle bodies are covered by a special bony or cartilaginous shell developed from their what?
ribs

What device uses an electromagnet to change electrical energy to kinetic energy?
electric motor

What causes the particles of medium to move parallel to the direction of the wave?
longitudinal waves

Which state of matter lacks a fixed volume, fixed shape, and consists of charged particles?
ions

What type of cell transmits electrical impulses in the nervous system?
nerve cell

What is the force pushing a rocket called?
thrust

In headwater streams, what plant process is mostly attributed to algae that are growing on rocks?
photosynthesis

What is the term that refers to stored chemical energy in organic matter or wastes?
biomass energy

The process of photosynthesis ultimately gets powered by what kind of energy?
light

A binary molecular compound is a molecular compound that is composed of what?
two elements

Within the first 8 weeks of gestation, a developing embryo establishes the rudimentary structures of all of its organs and tissues from the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. this process is called what?
organogenesis

What goes through different larval stages?
crustaceans

What is the major cause of chronic respiratory disease as well as cardiovascular disease and cancer?
smoking

Monotremes, marsupials, and placental mammals are subclasses of what?
mammals

What type of mammal gives birth to young that need to develop further in the mother's pouch after birth?
marsupials

What is the measure of how closely molecules are packed together?
density

What is the leading cause of lung cancer?
tobacco smoke

The golgi removes some sugar monomers and substitutes others, producing a large variety of what?
carbohydrates

Parenchymal, collenchymal, and sclerenchymal cells are associated with what types of living things?
plants

What is the name of the location in which a stream or river starts?
source

What disease occurs when cells in the breast grow out of control and form a tumor?
breast cancer

What process refers to the changes that occur in populations of living organisms over time?
evolution

Alkenes can react with what to form alcohols?
water

Wind blown sand contributes to what type of erosion?
abrasion

Bases are ionic compounds consisting of hydroxide ions and a what?
cation

What causes the menstrual cycle to be repeated?
lack of fertilization

What happens when turgid cells in a nonwoody tissue push against each other?
the tissue stiffens

What is the waxy substance that epidermal cells secrete?
cuticle

What is the length of the route between two points?
distance

According to the first law of thermodynamics, what can neither be created nor destroyed?
energy

What are the three primary pigment colors?
cyan, yellow, magenta

How do organophostbate pesticides work?
inhibiting acetylcholinesterase

In the case of a light bulb, electricity is converted to light and what kind of energy?
thermal

Where in relation to the home, are levels of vocs found to be higher?
indoors

Density and pressure of air decreases with what?
altitude

Energy is absorbed in the process of converting a liquid at its boiling point into a what?
gas

Images in what type of mirror are reversed left and right but not reversed top and bottom?
plane mirror

What do cells produce as they age?
proto-oncogenes

The body of the simplest sponges takes the shape of a cylinder with a large central cavity, called?
spongocoel

Laid on dry land by reptiles, amniotic eggs have what that prevents them from drying out?
waterproof membranes

What three rs represent the steps that you personally can take to conserve our natural resources and minimize waste?
reduce, reuse, recycle

What is the process that allows organisms with better traits to survive and produce?
natural selection

What is the term for a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction but is not changed or used up in the reaction?
a catalyst

What type of compounds can form crystals?
ionic compounds

In grazing, a predator partially eats but does not kill what?
prey

Bone tissues include compact bone, spongy bone, bone marrow, and?
periosteum

What type of bacteria causes the disease called tuberculosis?
mycobacterium

Studies have shown that not only does reproduction have a cost as far as how long male fruit flies live, but also fruit flies that have already mated several times have limited amounts of this?
sperm

What are the two most common causes of diseases?
bacteria and viruses

Organic compounds are defined as covalently bonded compounds containing carbon, excluding carbonates and what else?
oxides

What drives the turbine in a thermonuclear reactor?
heated water or steam

What is the term for physicians and scientists who research and develop vaccines and treat and study conditions ranging from allergies to aids?
immunologists

Where are temperatures the lowest?
at the poles

Protecting the surface of metal prevents what?
corrosion

What type of tissues are major barriers to the entry of pathogens into the body?
mucosal

Trash that gets into fresh and saltwater waterways is called what type of debris?
aquatic

What is the term for genes that control the expression of other genes within specific regions of cells in the developing organism?
gap genes

In vertebrates, what tissue is a type of connective tissue that supports the entire body structure?
bone

Red blood cells don't have a nucleus. this allows them to do what?
carry more oxygen

The number of electron pairs that hold two atoms together is called?
bond order

What occurs when the immune system makes an inflammatory response to a harmless antigen?
allergies

What energy source, now making a comeback, has helped propel ships and pump water for many years?
wind energy

What is it called when the nucleus of an atom splits into two smaller nuclei?
nuclear fission

The curie (ci) is one measure of the rate of what?
decay

A unique type of organism is also known as what?
species

Snakes use what anatomical structure to smell scents in the air?
forked tongue

What chemical element helps forms strong bones and teeth in humans?
calcium

The limit to how much solute will dissolve in a given amount of solvent is called what?
solubility

What occurs when hot magma transforms rock that it contacts?
contact metamorphism

What term refers to entities, events or powers regarded as being beyond nature, and cannot be explained by scientific means?
supernatural

What causes an elastic force in springs?
stretching or compressing

What effect is responsible for flight paths looking curved?
coriolis effect

Wetlands are environments in which the soil is either permanently or periodically saturated with what?
water

When the ground absorbs the water and it settles below the surface it is called what?
groundwater

Some metabolic pathways release what by breaking down complex molecules to simpler compounds?
energy

What is the smallest portion of a crystal lattice?
unit cell

What is one major cause of skin cancer?
ultraviolet light

Which important decomposers are known to live just about anywhere on earth?
archeans

In the scientific method, what is the initial, unproven explanation for why something is occurring?
hypothesis

What is the name of an element with a different number of neutrons?
isotope

Nitrogen and sulfur oxides form what type of rain?
acid rain

Polyester fabric's resistance to wrinkling comes from the cross-linking of what?
polymer strands

What term refers to the sequence of community and ecosystem changes after a disturbance?
ecological succession

What is the network of fibers that organizes structures and activities in the cell called?
cytoskeleton

Decreasing the volume of a gas and keeping everything else the same will cause its pressure to change in what way?
increase

What evolutionary strategy enables substantial activity during sleep for some animals?
adaptation

The cells of the blastocyst form an inner cell mass called the what?
embryoblast

How do all musical instruments create sound?
vibration

What system disorders include kidney stones, kidney failure, and urinary tract infections?
urinary system

What type of respiration has the advantage of releasing more energy?
aerobic

Major climate types are based on what two things?
temperature & precipitation

When amino acids bind together, they form a long chain called what, which is an essential component of protein?
polypeptide

What type of cells does meiosis produce?
haploid daughter cells

Organisms that lack both a nucleus and membrane-bound organelles are known as what, in general?
prokaryotic

What happens to most of the energy in a trophic level as it passes to the next higher level?
it is lost

What is the name for a specific amount of solute that can dissolve in a given amount of solvent?
solubility

What is freshwater below the earth's surface called?
groundwater

What forms when crystals precipitate out from a liquid?
chemical sedimentary rocks

What do people build to protect areas from floods?
dams

What system of the body is responsible for ultimately ridding it of waste and excess water?
excretory system

What's it called when there's a sudden flow of mud?
mudflow

Which zone is located below 200 meters from the surface?
aphotic zone

Food chewed evenly during mastication moisten and lubricate the lining of the mouth and this?
pharynx

Photosynthesis is initiated by what hitting plants?
sunlight

What is the process of drawing general conclusions based on many pieces of evidence?
inductive reasoning

Name the fibrous joint in which two parallel bones are united to each other by fibrous connective tissue.
syndesmosis

What's the best way humans can conserve water?
use less

Although fewer in number than chemical synapses, what type of synapses are found in all nervous systems and play important and unique roles?
electrical synapses

What consists of a nitrogen atom bonded to some combination of carbons and hydrogens?
an amine

When do hammerhead sharks usually hunt?
at night

What types of glands do only female mammals have?
mammary

What is the unit used to measure air pressure?
millibar

In which stage does the chromatin condense into chromosomes?
prophase ii

What is the upper-most atmosphere known as?
thermosphere

Reproduction that doesn't involve a male gamete is also known as what?
agamogenesis

What is the term for an electronic component that consists of many other electronic components?
integrated circuit

What is another term for life science?
biology

What type of cartilage contains no collagen?
lamprey cartilage

In prokaryotes, what are the regions called that repressors bind to?
operators

What instrument has a resolution many times greater than a light microscope, and can be used to see the details on the outside of a cell?
electron microscope

The temperature at which the individual ions have enough kinetic energy to overcome the attractive forces that hold them in place is called?
melting point

What play several important roles in the human body?
lipids

What is a measure that has both size and direction?
vector

What is to blame for water’s boiling point (100°c) being higher than the boiling points of similar substances?
hydrogen bonds

Carbonic acid decomposes easily at room temperature into carbon dioxide and what else?
water

What form when a single atom gains or loses electrons?
monatomic ions

In earthworms, the skin serves as what type of organ?
respiratory

Catalytic converters used on motor vehicles break down pollutants in what, yielding non-toxic compounds?
exhaust

Processing of filtrate in the proximal tubule helps maintain what level in body fluid?
ph

What helps represent age-sex structure of the population?
population pyramid

Large viruses began as what type of cells inside bigger host cells?
parasitic

How can you calculate the density of matter?
by dividing its mass by its volume

Frogs and toads have long back legs which are specialized for what action?
jumping

Different regions of the cerebral cortex can be associated with particular functions, a concept known as what?
localization of function

What is the term for a change in the inherited traits of organisms over time?
evolution

What type of diseases do antibiotics not affect?
viruses

Which system carries out long-distance transport of materials between the root and shoot systems?
vascular tissue system

How do reptiles typically reproduce?
sexually

All organisms must adapt to what in order to survive?
environment

Biochemical compounds that include sugars, starches, and cellulose are examples of what?
carbohydrates

What emerges from an insect egg?
larva

What can protons and neutrons be broken down into?
quarks

What is the name of the stage of life when a child becomes sexually mature?
puberty

What part of the brain is divided from front to back into the left and right hemispheres?
cerebrum

Because their cells are arranged in bundles, the appearance of skeletal and cardiac muscles is described as what?
striated

What resource is considered nonrewable for human purposes, because it takes so long to form and is depleted by farming and other activities?
soil

What in orange juice makes it taste sour?
citric acid

What scientist created the modern system for classifying organisms?
linnaeus

What will be the effect to an organism if its homeostasis is not maintained?
death or disease

Since warmer molecules have more energy, they are more what?
active

If only blue light strikes green leaves what happens to it?
it is absorbed

Which type of animal creates useful substances such as honey, wax, lacquer, and silk?
insects

Stringed instruments can help show the relationship between tension and what in strings?
frequencies

Ectotherms undergo a variety of changes at the cellular level to acclimatize to shifts in what?
temperature

Convex lenses are thicker in the middle than at the edges so they cause rays of light to converge, or meet, at a point called what?
focus

What are magnesium carbonate, aluminum hydroxide, and sodium bicarbonate commonly used as?
antacids

What type of taste do bases normally have?
bitter

Which body part helps roundworm prevent their body from expanding?
tough cuticle covering

The maintenance of constant conditions in the body is also known as what?
homeostasis

What is the term for tough protein fibers that connects bones to each other?
ligaments

What is the study of macroscopic properties, atomic properties, and phenomena in chemical systems?
physical chemistry

Bones, cartilage, and ligaments make up what anatomical system?
skeletal system

What is the first part of the large intestine called?
cecum

What occurs when nature reclaims areas formerly occupied by life?
secondary succession

To solubilize the fats so that they can be absorbed, what organ secretes a fluid called bile into the small intestine?
gall bladder

When the hemoglobin loses its oxygen, it changes to what color?
bluish red

How are weather patterns formed?
uneven heating of the atmosphere

Boyle discovered that what property of a gas is inversely proportional to its volume?
pressure

What amazing machines smash particles that are smaller than atoms into each other head-on?
particle accelerators

The interaction of what opposite factors describe a biome and ecosystem?
abiotic and biotic

What is caused by differences in density at the top and bottom of the ocean?
deep currents

What is the layer of tissue between the body and shell called?
mantle

Well suited to absorb water and dissolved minerals from the soil, thin-walled dermal cells and tiny hairs cover what basic plant structures?
roots

What is the major artery of the body, taking oxygenated blood to the organs and muscles of the body?
aorta

What do you call a growing mass of cancerous cells that pushes into nearby tissues?
tumor

What is the major intracellular cation?
potassium

The enzyme pepsin plays an important role in the digestion of proteins by breaking down intact protein to what short-chain amino acids?
peptides

What remains a constant of radioactive substance over time?
rate of decay

Terrestrial ecosystems, also known for their diversity, are grouped into large categories called what?
biomes

High explosives create shock waves that exceed the speed of sound, a phenomenon that goes by what term?
supersonic

What do you call a structure composed of two or more types of tissues that work together to do a specific task?
organ

